Who are you? I am a personalized chatbot trained from Guru-Granth Sahib. 
  Hi(ਸਿਤ ਸ਼੝ਰੀ ਅਕਾਲ) How may i help you !

What is marriage its answer is In Sikhism, wedding, or Anand Karaj, is not merely a social contract but a sacred union of souls, signifying the commitment of the couple to God and to the Sikh way of life. It's a ceremony focused on mutual love, loyalty, understanding, and the shared journey of spiritual growth. The Anand Karaj involves the couple circumambulating the Guru Granth Sahib four times, while hymns are recited or sung. These hymns highlight various aspects of marital life, such as the duties and responsibilities of husband and wife, emphasizing their mutual devotion to each other and to God. 

What is sikhism : Sikhism, a relatively young religion, emerged in the 15th century in the Punjab region of India. Its core teachings are rooted in the revelations of ten Gurus, spiritual leaders who emphasized the oneness of God, the importance of meditation, and the equality of all human beings.   

The Guru Granth Sahib, the holy scripture of Sikhism, is considered the eternal Guru. It contains the teachings and compositions of the ten Gurus, as well as other spiritual masters. This scripture emphasizes the importance of living a moral and ethical life, serving humanity, and fighting against injustice.   

Sikhism rejects the caste system and promotes the idea of a classless society.

It encourages Sikhs to earn an honest living and share their wealth with others. Sikhs are also expected to participate in community service and to defend the weak and oppressed.   


Translated and annotated by
Dr. GOPAL SINGH, M.A.., Ph.D.

i

ALLIED PUBLISHERS PVT. LIMITED

NEW DELHI MUMBAI KOLKATA CHENNAI NAGPUR
AHMEDABAD BANGALORE HYDERABAD LUCKNOW
ALLIED PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED

Regd. Off. : 15 J.N. Herédia Marg, Ballard Estate, Mumbai 400001
12 Prem Nagar, Ashok Marg, Opp. Indira Bhawan, Lucknow 226001
Prarthna Flats (2nd Floor), Navrangpura, Ahmedabad 380009
3-2-844/6 & 7 Kachiguda Station Road, Hyderabad 500027
5th Main Road, Gandhinagar, Bangalore 560009
1/13-14 Asaf Al Road, New Delhi 110002
17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Kolkata 700072
81 Hill Road, Ramnagar, Nagpur 440010
751 Anna Salai, Chennai 600002

© Author, 1960
(All Rights Reserved by the Author)

ISBN $1-7764-304-5 (Set)
ISBN 81-7764-305-3

First Edition, 1960
Reprinted, 1962, 1963, 1965
Revised Edition, 1978
Reprinted, 1984, 1987, 1989, 1993, 1996, 2002, 2005

No part of the material protected by this copyright notice may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical including photocopying, recording or by any information storage and retrieval system, without
written permission from the copyright owners.

Price : Rs. 1900.00 (Full set of 4 Vols.)

Published by Sunil Sachdev and printed by Ravi Sachdev at Allied Publishers Private Limited,

Printing Division, A-104 Mayapuri, Phase-ll, New Delhi - 110 064 7005

Page 
Drdicated
be
the great Sikh People
whose fraternity

ney revered father, now Lit heavens,

joined, blest by the Carus Crace, and
lucaing his back Pie worldly a Huence,
died a marly to the Cause.

Page 
Page 
TABLE OF CONTENTS

MESSAGE : From Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, President of India
MESSAGE : From Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru

PREFACE :; &y Shri U. N. Dhebar, former President, Indian National Cinshéad
INTRODUCTION : 8y Shri N. ¥. Gadgil, ex-Governor of the Punjab
SOME OPINIONS

On the Compilation of the Guru Granth

On the Philosophy of Sikh Religion

The Story of the Sikh Gurus

JAPU

S0-DARU

SOHILA

SRI RAG

Ashtapadis

Pahre

Chhants

Fanjara

Var of Sri Rig (with Shalokas)

The Word of the Bhaktas
RAG MAJH

Ashtapadis

Bara Maha M. 5
MESSAGE FROM H.E. DR. S. RADHAKRISHNAN, PRESIDENT OF INDIA

I have now looked through the volumes of GURU GRANTH SAHIB
I read the different introductions and

(English Version).
It is an impressive work which

glanced through the Translation.
will be found extremely valuable to all students of Sikhism as well

as comparative religions,

(Sd.) S. RADHAKRISHNAN

New Delhi;
21 November, 1961

Page 
MESSAGE FROM PRIME MINISTER JAWAHARLAL NEHRU

PRIME MINISTER'S HOUSE
NEW DELHI

March 27, 1960

I was presented with a copy of the English version of Shri
Guru Granth Sahib translated and annotated by Dr. Gopal Singh.
In looking through this monumental work, I have admired the labour and
scholarship of the translator and I must congratulate him on this achievement,
He has performed a worthy and necessary task. I am glad that this famous
book has now been brought to a wider circle of readers. It is a great book
and all who read it will profit by it. To the Sikhs it is Holy Scripture.
But, even by others who are not Sikhs it is greatly respected and many have
profited by its reading. ,

T welcome this fine edition of Shri Guru Granth Sahib.

JeretankeR Nebon

Page 
PREFACE

{ By Shri U.N. Dhebar, President of the Indian National Congress J

In the process of its journey from a cave life predominantly animal to the present stage of
civilization, the human mind has fashioned a fabulous number of mediums—some evolutionary, some
revolutionary, One of the most powerful of such mediums has been religion, Humanity owes to this
medium more than to any other many a quality of head and heart that it has come to develop. It is true
that sometimes religion has cast its lot with reactionary ideologies. But then the position, more often
than not, has been that it itself has fallen a victim to ignorance or greed of its votaries,

What is the purpose for which this medium has been fashioned ? If we read the story of religion
and the way, in which it has worked, there are many a thing which we do not like or may even appear too
hideous to us. But the essential purpose of religion has been to inspire, to build up faith, to widen the

orbit of human relationship, to foster those virtues which enrich human life and finally to provide some

answers to questions that have vexed our mind, ever since we became inquisitive: “Where do we come

from and whither do we go and what is the purpose of all life's ado 7”

The process through which Indian history in the last millennium has passed is a curious mixture
of religious thinking and non-religious acting. This only shows that the mediums that we have fashioned
for our progress cannot be easily co-ordinated and the problems of life are getting the better of the religious
teachings, There was good ground for this happening. . Sometimes one has too much of a particular aspect
of life. We thought of only the spirit allowing the earthly to be forgotten. A human being is composed of
physical as well as spiritual material. The physical elements are subject to the laws of physical nature, and
the nature can be won over but cannot be suppressed. Too much of suppression exercised upon natural
functioning has resulted in some morbid and perverse reactions. Our thinking has become lop-sided. The
van of life is trying to drag itself on one wheel. We have neither been able to serve fully our spiritual

interests nor our worldly interests.

At the other extreme stand persons who feel that religion is an anachronism in the modern world,
They base their argument wpon the idea that religion is more an incident of faith than reason. This is an
over-simplification of the whole philosophy of religion. Though in addressing those who have not attained
that intellectual level religion has resorted to the medium of faith, it cannot be said that that is its funda-

mental approach or ultimate character.

Those who have had anything to do with a closer study of religion will acknowledge the immeasur-
able assistance they have received in rationally understanding the problems of life, of society and of the
creation. While it has enabled them to face the challenges of day-to-day life in a more or less detached
manner, it has undoubtedly enriched their own conception of life, of the society and of the universe,
Mahatma Gandhi is one of the noblest and richest examples before the whole human family of what religion
can do to help a person to find his way out not only for himself but for vast masses of people and humanity.

Gandhiji himself has borne testimony to it.

In the book that Shri Gopal Singhji places before the wider public we have some illustrious exam-
ples of the workmanship of religion, The intensely sensitive and conscious mind of Guru Nanak is repelled
at the manner religion was being preached and the name of God was being bandied. He led the trail
once again for others to follow. His heart was intensely stirred. He saw that the people were suffering
and religion was of no avail in lightening their burdens. His was the compassion of the most contagious
character. The nine Gurus in succession could succeed in imparting this message of new faith and place

new objectives before the people.

Page 1
[xX]

Those who have tested the importance of the ‘Name of God’ realise what a change it can bring about
in the human psychology. Gandhiji relied upon ‘Ram-Nam’. To him that was the remedy against
despair and frustration because most of our individual and social diseases spring from lack of faith in our-
selves, Here the use of the ‘Name’ is not mechanical nor is it’concerned with worldly results. It is the starting point of a new process. ‘This process begins with the intellectual realisation that life is dependent upon
spirit, and, what is more, that spirit is not dependent upon life. The whole fallacy starts with a wrong
understanding of the role of the spirit and of physical self. Constant repetition of God's Name works as
a constant reminder of this destination and operates as a constant insistence to relate our actions on the
physical and mental plane to the spiritual objectives of life. This does not mean ignoring the physical and
mental plane, This only challenges the monopolistic use of the self for merely physical or earthly ends. It
envisages a process to establish an equilibrium in life.

Repetition of the ‘Name’ is not even conceived as a mental exercise. It is conceived as a medium to
establish contact with those regions of human conscience which have not been contacted and which constitute reservoirs of energy unequalled by any other energy. It is called by those who have established such
contacts as ‘love’, Love is an energy more potent, more creative and more resplendent than any other
energy yet discovered,

The whole conception of the Gurus, as the conception of any true religion, is based upon this creative resplendent energy to be used to heal the wounds and build the hearts, than inflict the wounds or break
the hearts.

Sardar Gopal Singhji, despite his western education and despite his immersion in the other
fields, has rendered a great service to the cause not only of Sikh religion but to the cause of human civilization in unfolding to the English-knowing readers the great message of Guru Nanak and his successors. Any
one who will go through the book will be impressed not only with the devotion and zeal of the author but
also with the breadth of his vision and his catholicity which indeed are the true characteristics of a true
religion and a genuine believer. The long years that Sardar Gopal Singhji has spent upon the work could
have received the appreciation of any one even if the rendering were in prose, Here is an effort, however, to
translate in free verse. I am sure those, who will approach the great book, that has been inspiring
millions of human beings for the last four hundred years, will find that the message of the Guru Granth Sahib
has been transmitted to him with as much devotion and as faithfully as any human being could have done.

The whole plan of the-work is admirable and I have no doubt that it will ensure a place of honour
for the author for long years to come.

New Delhi
March 22, 1960, U.N. DHEBAR

Page 1
INTRODUCTION
(Ay Shri N. V. Gadgil, Governar of the Panjab)

Dr. Gopal Singh has translated Guru-Granth Sahib in English. Dr. Gopal Singh's attempt is the first
of its kind and js distinguished both by deep scholarship and a high regard for truth. With his back-
ground of Sikh religion and his own comparative study of other Indian religious systems, ] may say he has
caught the truc spirit of Gurban’. Years before, two westerners, Dr, Trumpp and Mr, Macaulifle, did translate
portions of Guru-Granth Sahib in English. Guru-Granth Sahib was compiled by the fifth Sikh Guru, Arjan
Dev, about 1604. He had before him the sayings and songs of his four predecessors. To them he added
sayings and songs of the Hindu Bhaktas and Muslim Sufis. The sayings and songs of Guru Teg Bahadur
were added by the last Guru, Gobind Singh. The Guru-Granth, since then, remains as it is and there have
been no further additions. Guru-Granth Sahib contains 5894 hymns, and, as Dr. Gopal Singh points, the
largest compositions are by Guru Arjan Dev—2216, Guru Nanak—976 hymns, Guru Tegh Bahadur—I 18, and
Bhaktas and other songs 937, Guru-Granth Sahib contains the songs and sayings not only of the regular

“Sikh Gurus but the songs and sayings of Ravidas, Kabir, Namdev and other saints who were held in
high esteem in these times when the Sikh religion dawned on the world. The Granth, in the words of
Dr, Trumpp, who was the first translator of this holy book into English, is “the treasury of the old Hindvi
dialects”, One may say that here is an attempt to have a synthesis of current religious and cultural thinking
and one may say without fear of contradiction that this has been done with great success. Today the langu-
age of the Guru-Granth Sahib seems archaic but at the time, when the Guru-Granth was first compiled, it
was the language of literary expression though not of common use of the community. The songs are
composed in various Ragas and variety of metre is used and one gets completely absorbed and is forgetful
of the physical surroundings when one hears them sung in any holy Gurdwara, To translate a book of that
kind in any other non-Indian language is a difficult proposition, Dr. Trumpp’s translation, which was
published in 1870, cannot, by any standard, be considered true or even substantially satisfactory. The trans-
lation of several verses, of the Guru-Granth by Mr, Macauliffe is no doubt better but even Mr. Macauliffe has
not succeeded in bringing out in the translation either the beauty of the phrase, the appropriateness of the
metaphor or the spirit of the song itself. It is often said that it is easier to compose something original but
far difficult to translate the same in any other language. Every language has a genius of its own and every
word in that language has a spiritual significance which it is very difficult for any person who does not
claim that to be his mother-tongue, and it is equally difficult for a person whose mother-tongue is that
language, 10 translate it with the same effect and the same significance. It is a platitude.to say that words
constitute only form and the meaning, the content or the soul, and yet in literature and particularly in
religious books words do matter more than anything else. It is obvious that the original form cannot be
reproduced in a translation.

Dr, Gopal Singh's contribution measured by well-known literary tests may be considered as one
coming up substantially to these standards. He has also included in this volume his views on the philosophy
of Sikh religion. The Sikh religion, it may be said, prohibits idolatry, hypocrisy, caste exclusiveness, the
concremation of widows, the use of wine and other intoxicants, tobacco-smoking, infanticide, slander,
pilgrimages to the sacred rivers and tanks. At the same time in a positive way, it inculcates gratitude,
philanthropy, justice, impartiality, truth, fearlessness, honesty, in brief, those qualities and virtues which are
common to all religions. The founder of Sikh religion or Sampradaya is undoubtedly Guru Nanak. It is
stated in one of the Sikh scriptures{ that “in every age the Lord did send his servants, Ram in Treta Yuga,
Krishna in Dwapar and Ninak in the Kali Yuga". In Gita, Lord Krishna has said, ‘When there is an
atmosphere of irreligion, J take Avrar in order to put down irreligion and uphold religion”, Nanak is
considered jn that context as the man of the age or “Yuga Karta”.

The social and economic conditions which prevailed when Nanak was born are described in various
hymns and songs by Guru Nanak himself. There was the Mohammedan rule and no woman's honour, no

Page 1
{ XIT ]

man's self-respect was safe. Loot, even without pretence to any duly promulgated law was the order of the
day. Apart from political conditions, there was social degradation which was all too common and people .
believed more in symbols than the essential significance of the teachings of their respective religious books,
The need of the hour was to restore faith in God, re-interpret the philosophy of life and bring the people at
large on the right path. The social distinctions in terms of castes and classes were considered to be natural
with the result that the economically backward continued to remain so while the enlightenment was reserved
for the few.

Nanak placed first things first. He described God as one without fear, without enmity. He is one
for all Hindus and Mohammedans. He is the Creator of all that one <inds in the world. He neither hates
nor indulges in curses. He is not limited by time but He still is and is an existing reality and He is attain-
able through the grace of Guru. By His order, all form appeared and by His order all life came into
existence. As stated in Sukhmani, the Guru says, “I simply know that the whole creation is strung
in the thread of His order’. This is the background of the great idea of brotherhood of man and-it is the
key-note ofthe teachings of the Gurus and also indication of the social relationship of the Sikhs with the
rest of mankind, It has been stated, “Let no one be proud of his caste. He, who knows Brahma, is the
Brahmin. Do not be proud of your caste, All men talk of four Parnas, The whole creation germinated out
of one Brahma. Out of the same clay the whole creation is moulded. The potter makes them in various
ways”. According to Sikh religion, nobody belongs to any higher caste or a lower caste. Karta and Karim
are one. In every one dwells the same light and the same God. The idea of unity of spirit was not a new
thing in India. The great contribution, however, of Sikh religion and its Gurus was translation of this high
philosophy and high purpose into every-day action of men and women. The great institution of Amrit
Sauskara is proof how this doctrine was sought to be given a concrete form. Amrit Sanskara is available to
any one without any distinction of caste or creed. Sikh philosophy does not prescribe Dharma in terms of
occupations or professions but the broad principle ts that every one must serve the Sanget. Amrit Sanskara
is both for men and women and the duties make no difference in terms of Sikhs. In a sense, there is more
of democratic spirit in Sikh religious philosophy. Through faith and love, every Sikh is expected t to
eliminate egoism. Every Sikh is expected to “‘sell his mind to the Guru”.

The very word ‘Sikh’ is Apbhransa (a79'q) of the Sanskrit word Shishya (fret). This indicates that
there must be a Guru if there is a Shishya. Therefore, Guru in Sikh philosophy has a great position although
he is not considered God or an incarnation of the deity. In fact the tenth Guru has said, “Those who call
me supreme Lord will go to hell”. One may say that Guru is the vehicle through which Love and Grace of
the great infinite God is carried and communicated to the people at large. “The servants of the Lord come
for doing good to others. They infuse spiritual life, inspire devotion and unity of man with the Lord. They
themselves have been saved and come for the salvation of the world", “He alone is called Satguru who has
realised the eVer-lasting Purusha, By his company the disciple will be saved, O Nanak, by singing the
praises of God". Apart from spititual teachings, the Sikh religion lays down a code of conduct since
the dominant note in Sikh religion is correct conduct. Here is what one finds in Var Majha, “What
belongs to others is like beef for a Hindu and pork for a Mohammedan. The Guru will acknowledge those
(as his disciples) who do not subsist on ill-gotten wealth”. “By mere talk one cannot reach heaven ; it is
the practice of truth that saves. By spices (plausible talk) you cannot turn the unlawful into lawful. |
(Saith) Nanak, by false talk you will be left with falsehood alone”, Speaking about ceremonials without
the necessary spirit, Guru Nanak has said, “They who continue to perform ceremonial works but are
egoistic bear a crushing load. When there is no love for the Name, such works are sinful’. Talking about
learning and practice of Yoga, here is what Nanak says, “Even though a man be versed in the six systems
of Hindu Philosophy, and practise Puraka, Kumbhaka, and Rechake (inhalation, retention and exhalation
of breath), even though he be intellectually illumined, practise meditation and perform ablutions at places
of pilgrimage ; only eat food cooked by himself, touch no money and live in a forest ; yet if he feels no
love for God's Name in his heart ; whatever he has done shall be transitory, Superior to him deem thou
a Chandala, O Nanak, in whose heart God dwelleth”, What the Gurus have done is very well described
as follows :—-

Page 1
[ MIN }

“The Guru united the fewer Varnas into one. The savarnas and avarnas all repeat His Name in
Satsang. The six schools of philosophy are like six seasons. The way of the Guru is to look at the one sun
{that causes them). _ Doing away with the 12 sects of Yogis, he repairs to the Guru's Sangat. He sings
the indestructible and unfathomable Word not contained in the Vedas and the books, The Gur-Sikhs fall
at each other’s feet, That is the sign by which they are known. Living in Maya they are unaffected by
it. Effacing their self they repeat the Name. They are now beyond blessings and curses”.

The tenets of the Sikh Gurus appeal more to the masses although the basic ideas and basic
philosophy were not different from the great Vedic religion. It can be seen that the Sikh religion is mona-
theistic and believes in one Supreme God, absolute, all-pervading, eternal, the Creator, the cause of causes,
without enmity, without hate, both immanent in his creation and beyond it, “He is sweet like the ripe
dates, like a rivulet of honey". “‘Of beauteous eyes and sparkling teeth, of sharp nose and luxurious hair,
of golden body, of alluring gait and steps like a peacock’s, eternally young, whose speech is ever-sweet.”
Name is everything. Name is a realization of God's Grace within oneself and which ultimately results in
the utterer becoming one with the uttered.

Dr. Gopal Singh has also given short sketches of all the ten Gurus. If Nanak as the first Guru was
of love and kindness, Guru Gobind Singh as the last Guru is slightly different. Guru Gobind Singh has
been often accused of his anti-Muslim bias. However, this is incorrect but the situation which he had
to" face was completely different. His father Guru Tegh Bahadur was killed. His sons were killed and two
of them-buried alive. His followers were killed. Therefore, he gave a turn not so much to the philosophy
of the Sikh religion as to the code of conduct expected of a Sikh who is determined to defend his religion.
Justifying the use of the sword, he said, ‘‘When the affairs were nast any other remedy, | thought it
righteous to unsheath the sword". Tt was he, who introduced the great institution of Amrit Savskiira and
inaugurated what is now called the “Khalsa Panth”, Today we see among the followers of this great Sikh
teligion a combination of the philosophy of surrender (7144) and the philosophy of sword. It should, how-
ever, be remembered that Guru Gobind Singh, the tenth and the last Guru, resorted to sword, as he himself
has said, as the Jast remedy, When appeal to reason and good sense fails, there is full moral and spiritual
justification for the faithful to resort to sword. The history of the Sikhs, during the last two hundred years,
is an illustration of the philosophy which was finally developed by Guru Gobind Singh.

Many people in India and abroad are anxious to learn more and more about the Sikh religion and
history of the Sikhs. WNon-Indians, of course, find it difficu]t to have a current and irue picture of what is
contained in the Guru-Granth through such translations as.are made by Dr. Trumpp and Mr. Macauliffe.
Many Indian people also like to know more about the Granth Sahib and although there are editions of the
Granth published in Devanagari script, yet for the people of the South, who do not know, by and large,
ihe Devanagari Script, an English translation of the kind now made by Dr. Gopal Singh will be of immense
help. [am sure, this great effort made by Dr. Gopal Singh will be appreciated by the public in Panjab, in
India and even abroad.

Chandigarh, N. V. GADGIL
Dated the 24th February, 1960 ; :

Page 1
SOME OPINIONS

Mrs. Pearl S, Buck, Nobel Laureate :

When I was in India in 1962, one of the notable events of my visit was the presentation to me of the
English version of Sri Guru-Granth Sahib, translated and annotated by Dr. Gopal Singh, I was deeply grate-
ful to receive this great work, for in the original it was inaccessible to me, and this was a matter of regret,
for I have had many Sikh friends, and have always admired their qualities of character. Now that I have
had time in my quiet Pennsylvania home to read their scriptures slowly and thoughtfully, I can understand
why I have found so much to admire. The religion of a people has a profound and subtle influence upon
them as a whole, and this is true whether individuals do or do not profess to be religious.

Shri Guru-Granth Sahib is a source book, an expression of man's loneliness, his aspirations, his
longings, his ery to God and his hunger for communication with that Being. I have studied the scriptures.
of other great religions, but I do not find elsewhere the same power of appeal to the heart and mind as I
find here in these volumes. They are compact in spite of their length, and are a revelation of the vast
reach of the human heart, varying from the: most noble concept of God, to the recognition and indeed the
insistence upon the practical needs of the human body. There is something strangely modern about these
scriptures and this puzzled me until I learned that they are in fact comparatively modern, compiled as late
as the 16th century, when explorers were beginning to discover that the globe upon which we all live is a
single entity divided only by arbitrary lines of our own making.

Perhaps this sense of unity is the source of power | find in these volumes. They speak to persons of
any religion or of none. They speak for the human heart and the searching mind. One wonders what might
have been produced if the ten founders of the Sikh religion had been acquainted with the findings of modern
science. Where would their quest for knowledge have led them had science been their means instead of
religion ? Perhaps in the same direction, for the most important revelation now being made by scientists
is that their knowledge, as it opens one door after another to the many universes in eternal existence, affirms
the essential unity of science and religion. It is impressive and significant that in the study of these
Sikh scriptures we see this affirmation through the approach of the brilliant minds and deep searching hearts
of men who are part of India. Through them we see a Beyond that belongs to us all. The result is a
universal revelation.

Let me speak of the translation itself. Each of the first three volumes is prefaced by helpful expla-
Balions contributed by notable scholars. For the western reader these are invaluable, providing the back-
ground and framework for the text. Having studied them, we continue with a confidence which is not
misplaced for the text itself proceeds to exposition with clarity and deceptive simplicity. I say deceptive,
for so skilfully has the translator done his work, that we read as though the translation were the original,
Only when we pause for reflection do we realize that the most profound:thoughts and concepts are expressed
through the strong yet simple writing whose modernity carries freshness. We are accustomed to ancient
texts embroidered with esoteric references, remote from our daily life, but here is a text which might have
been written by any one of similar insight and experience. For this freshness and directness, this combina-
tion of profundity with simplicity, I am sure we owe much to the translator, He writes with the style of a
poet, his English is faultless, and he has the spirit and intelligence necessary for so great a task, In short,
he has done a superb piece of work.

It is seldom indeed that one can praise whole-heartedly a translation of this nature. | bear in mind

that I cannot read the text in the original, It may be that someone who knows the original will see faults
that I cannot see because of my ignorance. I can only say that as a western reader who nevertheless has

Page 1
{ XV ]

some small understanding of the other side of our world, I find in this translation of the Sikh Scriptures a
great book. It speaks to me of life and death ; of time and eternity ; of the temporal human body and its
needs ; of the mystic human soul and its longing to be fulfilled ; of God and the indissoluble bond between

them,

Tam therefore deeply grateful to Dr. Gopal Singh that Shri Guru-Granth Sahib has been made
available to English-speaking readers everywhere in the world.

- = - - -

Dr, Arnold Toynbee :
“A splendid translation. [ congratulate the author on having carried through this great and
exacting piece of work. These volumes are a possession I value greatly.”

- * . - -

8. Kapur Singh, M.A. (Cantab), M.P. :

“The language and the vocabulary of the Guru-Granth, for good reasons, is not that of a semantic
Posilivist, purely conceptual and propositional. It is not rigorous, denotative, semantically aseptic,
suitable for science and mathematics. It is not so, because it deals with modes of intellectual and sensuous
reality founded not primarily on language but on other modes of communication, such as evocation of
imagery, pre-intellectual and para-intellectual emotive comprehension, the anaphore, alliteration, tropology,
anamnesis and onometopoeia, The language and vocabulary of the Guru-Granth is, therefore, conno-
tative, associative and subjective, and the Guru-Granth deliberately, and by a design, uses language not
“parely" but ambiguously and thus, mostly, it is not the words and their conventional meanings that are
of basic significance in the Guru Granth, unless the text is intended to be theoretical and propositional,
but the moss of meanings and associations and evocative power which the words employed have gathered
tound them throughout their centuries of evolution and usage, by men who have experienced the non-verbal
layers of reality. The poetic patina of the verbal vocabulary of the Guru-Granth does not necessarily
have equivalences or correspondences in the cross vocabulary of the English language. This renders the
translation of the Guru-Granth more difficult than that encountered by Kumarjiva (4th C. Circa) while
translating Mahayana texts into Chinese. ......""

“This translation is a landmark in the history of comparative religions in that it has thé distinction
of not only being close to the original word, but also expresses its spirit as well.”

Panjab Government in their Address of Welcome :

“You have already attained high distinction as a poet and critic, but now you have achieved,
single-handed, What our great literary institutions have not even dured to attempt. You are indeed the
Kumarjiva of modern times. Not only the pzople of Panjab, but the entire literary and philosophical
world stands indebted to you for this unique achievement.”

- * * = *

Master Tara Singh, President, Shiromani Gurdward Parbandhak Committee :

“The work that should have been accomplished long ago by the Sikh community or the Shiromani
Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee in view of its importance and need has been achieved, singlé-handed, by
an illustrious son of the Guru, But as Sheikh Saadi has said :

“This Glory one achieves not by the force of arms,
“Tis on whom is God’s Grace who attains to it”.

A stupendous task. bristling with difficulties, has been achieved with success. Dr. Gopal Singh
has written many works of high literary merit before also, but the English translation of the Guru-Granth

Page 1
[ XVI ]

Sahib surpasses them all, The whole community should be proud of him. Fruitful indeed is the time that
he has spent on this sacred work.”

[ “Dailp Parbhat”, dated I4th Jan., 1960 ]

The Khalsa Parliament Gazette (official organ of the Panch Khalsa Dewan, Bhasaur), writes :

“We are immensely pleased that Dr, Gopal Singh has fulfilled this long-standing demand of the
Sikh people. It is a great service that he has rendered to the community and to the world at large. His
genius is well-known, but this stupendous task which he has completed with success, is worthy of our
highest esteem”.

[ Movember, [958 ]

* * * ; * : *

Principal Gurbachan Singh Talib, Kurukshetra University :

“This magnificent work has brought the author in line with the great savants of the East. He has
tried with a degree of labour and devotion which is only too apparent in his winnowing of suitable
vocabulary and his well-chosen turn of phrase and sentence, to convey his readers the spirit and appeal
of the original. I would not hesitate to say that if an “Authorised Version” in English of the Sikh Bible
is to be named it must be this one.”

“The Times Literary Supplement”, Lendon :
“A remarkable work which has great literary as well as religious significance.”

Swami Shivananda, Siivananda Ashram, Rishikesh:
“You have done a noble service. May Lord bless you |"

Maharaj Charan Singh, Head of the Radhaswami Sect, Beas :

“No words will be adequate to express my heart-felt appreciation. It is, indeed, a beautiful work

and captures the spirit of the original.”
%

* * * * *
Sadhu TL. Vaswani :

“A precious treasure. God bless thee, beloved brother, for the service thou hast rendered not to
a community alone, not 1o India alone, but to the wide world: You are a servant of Humanity. May
all the nations and all the races and all the religions of the world bless thee and give thee salutations of
reverent love,”

E.M. Forster, Novelist :

“A magnificent work. 1 knew too little about ‘the Sikh community and its colture, and a glance
inte these volumes shows me how much I have been missing.”

Page 1
{ XVIT j

Sardar Kashmira Singh, Ex-Principal, Khalsa College, Bombay :

“T had the good fortune of listening to readings from the English translation of the Guru-Granth

Sahib, which the famous Sikh savant, Dr. Gopal Singh, has just completed, Even though many resource-
ful Sikh scholars and societies attempted to complete this gigantic task in the past, only a few selected
hymns and chants have so far been translated into the English language which is now the acknowledged

: international language of cultural exchange. With life-long labour and liberal help from the Government
' and Sikh princes, Mr. Macauliffe could only produce selections from the compositions of the Sikh Gurus
and other Saints—Hindu and Muslim—whose mystical compositions have been enshrined in the Guru-

Granth,

The Gurdwara Reform Movement which had the spreading of the Guru's Word, the fountain-head
of Sikh history and chivalry, as one of its basic aims, did not even attempt this great task. Inspired by
the Guru's Word, Dr. Gopal Singh has, after 15 years’ unremitting toil and research, single-handed, ,
completed this task in soft-flowing and dignified free-verse, steeped in the deep mystical experience of .
Divine Immanence and Divine Transcendence, He has increased the value of his work by giving. in foot-
notes, appropriate quotations from the world-famous Hindu scriptures like the Upanishads and the

Bhagwad Gita.
I congratulate Dr. Gopal Singh on his brilliant. historical achievement.

The age of giants in aim and execution is not a thing of the past.
God's blessings be upon him, for it is He who inspired him to complete this stupendous task.”

“fan a aren faa ot aba, Han foont @urat amy 1”

Bhai Jodh Singh, Vice Chancellor, Panjabi University :

“The exposition of Sikh principles and doctrines is very ably done. J congratulate him on accom-
plishing this great task so ably and single-handed. He has blazed the trail and shown to others who may
follow what persistent devotion to a cause may achieve.”

* - * * *

Dr. Taran Singh, M.A., Ph.D., Professor of Adi Granth Studies, Panjabi University :
“This work on the one hand has the intellectual maturity of Max Mueller and Radhakrishnan,
and on the other it has the mystic and poetic qualities of Shri Aurobindo and Rabindra Nath Tagore.”

* * * *- *

Dr, Mohan Singiz, M.A., Pb.D., D. Litt., Professor of Panjabi, Panjab University :

“Tt is @ stupendous work that my esteemed friend, Dr. Gopal Singh, has achieved. He has also
discussed with me the central tenets and the key-words, His approach has struck me as very fruitful.
Iam so happy that he has without any help from quarters from which it should have flowed, completed a

. task which will put Sikhism on the philosophical and literary map of the world,

1 wish him all success which he so richly deserves.”
= * = = LJ

The Times of India, Bombay & New Delhi :
“Dr, Gopal Singh has accomplished at an early age a task of the highest merit for which the

coming generations of Indians will be thankful.”

The Statesman, Calcutia :
“Outstanding rendering in free verse.”

Page 1
I
On the Compilation of the Guru-Granth

The Guru-Granth was compiled by the fifth Sikh Guru, Arjun, in 1604 A.D, He already had before him
the hymns of his four predecessors collected and put to writing by the second and the third Sikh Gurus.
The latter had even added some of the popular sayings of the Hindu Bhaktas:and Muslim Sufis as well.
Assembled in two volumes, the matuscripts lay with Baba Mohan, son of Guru Amaf Das, the third Sikh
Guru. From him, Guru Arjun procuredthese after some hard persuasion, as the holy Granth itself testifies,
Some writings of the Gurus were collected from other sources as well, and the whole was put to writing,
after a good deal of judicious pruning 10 separate the apocryphal writings, by Bhai Gutdas, a disciple of
the Gurus, under the direct supervision of Guru Arjun himself, Guru Gobind Singh, the tenth and the last
Sikh Guru, added some of the sayings of his father, Guru Tegh Bahadur, to the volume (and possibly one
couplet of his own), And this whole has come down to us in its otiginal purity,

This then is the only scripture of the world which was compiled by one of the founders of a religion
himself and whose authenticity has never been questioned.

The Granth, as we find it today, is arranged not subject-wise, but according to the musical measure
in which a hymn is meant to be sung. There are in all 31 such meastires (Or ragas), namely, Sri, Majh,
Gauri, AsA, Gujri, Devgandhari, Bihagra, Vadhans, Sorath, Dhandsri, Jaitsirl, Todi, Bairari. Tilang, Suhi,
Bilawal, Gound, Rimkali, Natnarain, Mali Gaura, Maru, Tukhari, Kedar, Bhairo, Basant, Sarang, Malhar,
Kanra, Kalyan, Parbhati and Jaijaivanti. As would be seen from the above ¢alalogue, the Gurus rejected
the measures which were expressive of excessive exuberance or unalloyed sadness,

Most of the Sikh Gurus were themselves great musicians, masters of the classical style. We are
aware that Guru Nanak always kept the company of a Muslim drummer, Mardana, who played on the
rebeck while Nanak sang to large audiences. Mardana’s descendants, who still keep to the Muslim faith,
are the most honoured of the musicians who sing to Sikh audiences to this day the Word of the Guru in
some of the best-known Sikh temples. Guru Arjun himself was a great vocalist and an instrumentalist.
And, as the whole Granth is written in poetry of the highest order, both music and poetry have formed an
inseparable part of the Sikh ritual and the Sikh cultural pattern, and runs through the blood of every man
and woman of this aesthetic faith.

The Granth contains, besides the writings of the Sikh Gurus, compositions of almost all the medieval
Hindu Bhaktas, like Kabir, Ramanand, Ravidds, Surdas, Sain and Bhikhan from the U.P.; Jaidev from
Bengal ; Namdev, Trilochan and Parmanand from Maharashtre ; Pipi and Dhann4 from Rajasthan ; and Beni,
then popular all over North India, The writings of five Muslims—Baba Farid, Bhikhan, Satta, Balwand
and Mardina are also incorporated in the Granth. Baba Farid, Ganj-i-Shakar, it may be noted, was a great
Muslim divine of the thirteenth century A.D. who did much to spread the gospel of Islam in India,

No other religion has perhaps shown this catholicity of outlook in bringing together views of such
diverse hues and even when they are diametrically opposed to the tenets of the faith of whose scripture they
now form an integral part. This whole book, now worshipped by the Sikhs the world over as the “living
embodiment of the Gurus”, as enjoined by Guru Gobind Singh, is the Scripture of the Sikhs, and the ¢x-
pungement of any portion thereof is considered sacrilegious. Some attempts were made by devout Sikhs in
the present time as well as in the past either to expunge the hymns of the Bhaktas or to separate the Guru's ©
Word from theirs, but every time an attempt was made, it was frustrated by the whole might of the com-
munity against this unholy endeavour, Here is then democracy in religion at its best. Undoubtedly, the
Gurus, when they felt inclined to disagree with a Bhakta, put in beside his their own views unmistakably,
but they never for once, criticised either the Muslim way of worship as such, which Farid advocated, or the
worship of Rama and Krishna which some of the Hindu Bhaktas advocate with such passion in the holy
Granth, although the Sikh Gurus themselves disavowed. belief in the incarnation of God and idol-worship.

Tt may be remarked herein passing that the Bhaktas, whose works were included in the Guru-Granth,
belonged, more often than not, to the lower classes of society. Kabir, for instance, was a weaver ; Nimdeva, a
calico-printer ; Dhanna, a cultivator ; Sadnd, a butcher ; Ravidas, a shoemaker ; Sain, a barber ; though Pipa

ee ne

Page 1
[ XIX) |

was a king and Trilochan, a Brahmin. But the emphasis in the Granth is on the lowest becoming the highest
and caste being of no consequence in the realisation of the Supreme Truth.

The arrangement of the Granth is as follows :

First comes Guru Nanak’s Japu, the Sikh morning prayer, followed by nine hymns repeated later
in the Granth in Ragas Asi and Gujri, which are sung in the evening. Then follow extracts from Ragas
Gauri, Asi and Dhanisri, which are recited before retiring to bed. Then follow verses in 31 Ragas which
form the main body of the Granth. Each Réga starts with the compositions of the Sikh Gurus and ends with
those of the Bhaktas, The last portion consists of Sanskriti Shalokas by Gurus Nanak and Arjun; Géthd,
Phynh? and Chaubolas by Guru Arjun, Shalokas of Kabir and Farid, Savaiyas by Guru Arjun and by several
bards in praise of the first five Gurus, Shalokas by Guru Nanak, which were left over from the Vdrs, and
Shalokas by Gurus Amar Das, Ramdas, Arjun and Tegh Bahadur. The piece called Munddvni is the
concluding chapter of the spiritual portion of the Granth. The tail-piece, called Ragmala, a catalogue of the
Ragas and their families, is also read by the devout Sikhs, though its authorship (which some ascribe to
Alam, a Muslim contemporary poet of Guru Arjun) is still in dispute.

The book contains 5894 hymns in all, out of which the largest number of compositions are by Gurit
Arjun (2216), Guru Nanak has 976 hymns to his credit, Guru Angad 61, Amar Das 907, Ram Das 679,
Teg Bahadur 118, and Bhaktas and bards, 937.

There is not a metre known to Indian prosody that was not employed by the Gurus, But innumer-
able variations have been introduced into them to make them more musical and to make their lyrical note
more intense. Even verse-libre and blank verse have also been experimented with, for the first time, I should
suppose, in any vernacular of India. -

The language of the Granth has now more or less become archaic, though at the'time it was
employed, it was the only accepted vehicle of literary expression. It is generally supposed that the language
of the Granth is pure Panjabi..At places, it undoubtedly is so, in all its varieties—Lehndi (western), central
and Poorbi (eastern). But by far the largest portion of the Granth is composed in a mixed language, which
for want of a better term, we may call Hindvi, a mixture of western Hindi, Parakrit, Braj, Panjabi and the
then current vocabulary of Persian and Arabic. So, not only in subject-matter, or religious affiliations of its
authors, but also in language, the Granth upholds the creed of synthesis as against exclusiveness of form,
symbols and ideas. Similarly, in art and architecture, music, system of Government, dress and diet, the
Sikh movement led in the synthesis of various schools of thought and it would be safe to venture an
opinion that in the evolution of Urdu, the Indo-sarcenic school of architecture and the Din-i-lahi of Akbar,
ihe Great, the Sikh movement had played a most noteworthy part. As students of history are aware, Akbar
was a great admirer of the Guru and came personally to pay his homage at the Guru's Court.

The Granth, as Dr. Trumpp has said, “is the treasury of the old Hindvi dialects”. Besides, it is a
source-book for compiling a socio-cultural history of North India of medieval time. Its idioms and proverbs
have become the stock-in-trade of every Panjabi for all occasions, no matter what his religion, profession
or place of residence.

The poetry of the Granth sings in symbols. But, the metaphor of the Granth is homely and direct,
such as one would come across in the daily run of one’s life. And yet, the word, sound and idea pictures,
in which the poetry of the Granth abounds, create such a perfect atmosphere of harmony between the subject
matter and its form that it defies every attempt at translation. No wonder the Granth has remained un-.
translated so far, in major parts, in any foreign language, in spite of the crude attempt of Dr, Ernest
Trumpp, a German missionary, in 1870 to render certain portions into English on behalf of the Government. :
of India and of the genuine, though literal, rendering of the selected verses of the Granth by Mr. M. As
Macauliffe in his “Sikh Religion’’ (published in 1909). * u

The present is thus the first, and the only, attempt at a translation of the whole volume of the
Granth after hard research of over fifteen years in consultation with almost all living Sikh authorities on the
subject. ‘The translation, for the most part, is strictly literal, word for word, except where it became im«
possible to express the sense through the idiom of the English language or where the dignity of the original
demanded a little departure in phrasing, but never 50 as to do violence to the basic-doctrines

Page 2
Page 21

II
On the Philosophy of Sikh Religion

Sikhism is the most modern, and yet the most misunderstood, of all the world religions, Some have
described it as an offshoot of the Bhakti cult inspired in its main tenets by Kabir. Others have taken it to
be a synthesis of Mohammedan monotheism and the Hindu metaphysics. A scholar has even suggested it to
be a crude form of Buddhism on account of its insistence on Nirrdén minus its atheism, which, to him, is the
logical result of the doctrine of. Nirvan, A school of Sikhs, called the Nirmalds, versed in Sanskrit and the
Hindu scriptures, has been interpreting it as a Vedantic creed, at best an exposition of the Bhagwad Gita,
A Muslim sect, the Qadiani, has been quoting chapter and verse to prove that Guru Nanak, the founder of
the Sikh faith, was a devout and an ardent Muslim. Sikhism has also been described as a qualified pantheism
and a moralising Dualism,

The confusion of interpretation has occurred because the Sikhs themselves, for historical and other .
reasons, have never seriously attempted a scientific and cogent exposition of the doctrines of their faith,
based on the Word of the GURU-GRANTH and related to the historical lives of the Gurus who uttered it.
Without reference either to one or the other, casual attempts made at the interpretation of small portions
of the Granth have resulted in such interpretations being incoherent, lop-sided, and therefore unreliable,
During the present century, several attempts were made by the Sikhs to translate into Panjabi the Word of
the Guru, but all such attempts ended in an all-too-literal translation, leaving the seeker as uninitiated
to the Guru's Word as he was before. And the word of the GURU-GRANTH became as involved and
distant for an average reader as the Word of the Vedas, and it started to be worshipped more than read,
uttered as a magic formula or a Manfram for secular benefit than as a discipline of spiritual! life for the
achievement of ideals higher and beyond the world of sense and for the integrity of mind and soul in the
world of the living.

The language of the GURU-GRANTH is becoming archaic for the present-day reader, if it has not
become so already. It is written in a script which is confined to the Panjab, Till recently, the words
of the GURU-GRANTH even in print could not be separated one from the other so that its correct reading
was restricted to the select few. And but for a few individuals, it has never occurred to the community
to define its basic tenets, and to answer the seeming contradictions in these tenets, in short to attempt an
integrated account of the Sikh view of life. Two notable attempts were made in this direction by two
Europeans, Dr, Ernest Trumpp and Mr. M.A. Macauliffe. But the former was too casual to have studied
the GURU-GRANTH seriously, and so he not only mistranslated the portions of the Granth which he
attempted, but also dismissed its study as of little consequence to a student of religion. The latter only
confined himself to the biographies of the Sikh Gurus and made only such occasional use of the Word of
the GURU-GRANTH, where it supported a particular thesis. No attempt was made by him to interpret
the Sikh credo, and he emphasised only the historical aspect of it, as it evolved from a pacifist creed to the
militant brotherhood of the Khalsa. :

Every religion has not only a history, but also a geography of its own, and anyone who emphasises
the one without reference to the other fails signally in any honest attempt at the interpretation of a religion.
Judaism, Christianity and Mohammiedanism have to be studied in relation not only to the times in which
they were born, but also to where they first found their home. The inter-relationship of Judaism and
Christianity cannot be over-emphasised. The latter is such a natural outcome of the former (but this does
fot mean for that reason that it is not distinct) that both seem to form a single family, The debt
Mohammedanism owes to both, being bounded by almost the same geography, is so obvious that even the
most casual observer would not fail to mark. And how much does Judaism owe to -its neighbouring
Zorastrianism 7 .

Before proceeding further, it would be desirable to elaborate this point, For, this would clear much
of the confusion that is sought to be created in relation to Sikhism in that it is either not a distinct religion,
having borrowed its main tenets from other religious systems, or that its ‘distinctness lies mainly in its
historical aspect.
[ XXI }

Let us take the Semitic religions, and of these Judaism, first, for with it are linked two other great
teligions of the world, Judaism rejected the idea of a Universal God, and made Him only a tribal ora
national god. But it also rejected polytheism and idolatry. It does not believe in a mediator or an:
intercessor between man and God and originally did not accept the validity of any cosmie force of evil, like
Satan, God being looked upon as the only source of good and evil, [t believes in a world to come, but one's ;
entry into it depends on the amount of righteousness he has had in this world rather than on his inherent
beliefs. The ideas of circumcision and abhorrence of the swine also originated with Judaism. About 750
years before Christ, the Jewish prophets, Amos and Hosea, had begun to preach of Jehovah's love rather
than his justice in which terms he was conceived carlier by Abraham. The transformation of the nation into
a Church with the high priest also being the head of the state came about 400 B.C. Like other Semitic
people, the Jews originally worshipped supernatural powers, not unlike the early Aryans, but gradually their
special tribal god, Yahweh, who led and protected them in war was raised, like Varuna in the Rig Veda and ,
Zeus among the Greck gods, to a special position and in course of time he. became their only God. This
God was so jealous that he would curse and punish those who worshipped.any other God but him, Over
350 years before Christ, the rivalry between Yahweh and Baal was silenced by the complete elimination of :
all the priests of Baal, His form, originally conceived as that of an animal, was transformed into human
and Yahweh now had not only the human form but also human sentiments and activity. He was also :
invested with moral and intellectual qualities, like thought, anger, hate, love, joy, sorrow, repentance and *
pity, and even a bit of intrigue, and fierce jealousy,

Before the Jews came into contact with the Persians, they did not, as has been pointed out above,
believe in any cosmic force of evil, like Satan, Isaiah makes Yahweh say :

“I form the light and create darkness,
I make peace and create evil.
I the Lord do all these things.”

But the Persian doctrine of Angra Mainyu (the Evil Spirit) turned Satan, an angel of God, whose
duty it was to report on the sins of man to his Master, into the source of wickedness and sin.

. The doctrine of life after death was originally not a part of the religion of the Jews, Yahweh
punished men for their wickedness or rewarded the pious only in this life. Later, these punishments and
the rewards were even transferred to the coming generations of the sinners. The idea of resurrection was
adopted only after the Jewish contact with Iran. Ata later date, under the influence of the Greeks, who,
in their turn, were influenced by the Hindu thinkers, Judaism accepted the idea of the immortality of the
soul. The belief that a Messiah would come in the human form to bring about the golden age having been
belied, people's mind turned more and more towards a Messiah in the skies, and the idea of the other world,
or the kingdom of heaven, was born, and the Messiah was thus spiritualised,

Animal sacrifice, which was a part of all primitive religions, Brahminism included, was originally
conceived of as a bait to secure Yahweh's favours, The burning of incense at the altar, and offerings of
grains and wine, also became a part of the Jewish ritual,

But as we read in the old Testament, in the days of the Prophets, God became compassionate, a
God of mercy, hating sacrifice, oblations and offerings and wanting that he be ‘known’ rather than pleased
with an elaborate ritual,

Similarly, the worship of Yahweh as a bull andas a brazen serpent and the courtesies paid to the
images were abandoned almost six centuries before the advent of Christ. Instead of the doctrine of “eye 4,
for an eye and tooth for a tooth", there is insistence in the Book of Prophets on ‘loving mercy’. The ethical
principles, later taken up bodily by Christianity, and corresponding to a Buddhist'’s code of conduct, reveal
to what extent Judaism has been influenced by other religious systems and to what extent its example has
been followed by its two worthy successors.

When Christianity took its birth, it built its edifice on the foundations laid by Judaism. Yahweh
was exclusively the God of the Jews, but Christ made him the God of the Universe. Animal sacrifice had
already been condemned by the Jewish Prophets, though among the common mass the idea was not generally
accepted. Christ, on the other hand, offered his own sacred head at the altar of God and by so doing assurea

Page 2
[ XXII ]

mankind of its eternal deliverance from sin once it accepted the path laid down by Christ. Christ henceforth
was to be no longer a historical personage, but an eternal pledge of mankind with itg only God for its redemp-
tion through the ages from moral evil which, according to Christ, was the source of man’s misery on the
earth. God was no longer jealous or cruel, intriguing against mankind and avenging Himself .on the
humans for their sinful conduct, but a God of compassion and pity, the Father in heaven, whose bountiful
Grace we, His children, were bound to receive if we prayed to Him in all humility for forgiveness, reassured
that as Christ, His son, was our pledge, we would be saved from eternal damnation and enjoy a blissful
existence in heavens eternally with our Father. These ideas of the immortality of the soul and of the resur-
rection of the dead accepted by Christianity were already familiar to the Jews.

Christian morality accepted the Ten Commandments of the Old Testament, (“Thou shalt not kill",
“Thou shalt not covet anything that is thy neighbour's", etc.), but added one more, the most significant and
positive of them all which has been responsible for much of Christian humanism. The negative command of
the Old Testament, “What ye would not that men do unto you, do ye also net unto them" was transformed
into a positive injunction, “What ye would that men should do unto you, do ye also unto them”.

The division of Christendom into Catholics and Protestants saw the Catholics emphasizing the ascetic
nature of Christ's teachings. Sayings like ‘Go, sell what thou hast and give to the poor”, and “If any man
comes to me and hates not his father and mother, and wife and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and
his own life also, he cannot be my disciple’ have led the Catholic monks and nuns to lead a life of renun-
ciation and dedicated service, prayer and fasting, celibacy and chastity. But the other great section of
Christianity, the Protestants, deriving their inspiration from Christ’s participation in the activities, and joys
of life have emphasised the realisation of Christian ideals, as in the case of the Jews, through honest, selfless,
secular activily with charity in the heart towards one’s fellow beings.

Although Christianity is thus a natural heir, speaking spiritually, of Judaism, in ethics it is the Hindu,
notably Buddhist thought which influenced Christianity a great deal. For, riches and personal possessions
were considered by Christ to be a great hindrance in the achievement of spiritual ideals, ‘Resist not evil but
whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also’, and “It js easier for a camel to
go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God" were the two maxims
emphasized most by the great Buddha six centurics before Christ. And how much more we come across in
the Bible against cate and selfishness and ego and ‘living by bread alone’, On the other hand, sayings like
“There is nothing better for a man than that he should eat and drink and that he should make his soul enjoy
good in his labour, this also I saw that it was from the hand of God" (ECC. 2.24), reveal a clear influence
of the then existing Judaistic ethics. :

Christ did not either attempt social reform or a political upheaval. “Render unto Caesar things that
are Caesar's and unto God the things that are God's" clearly defines the bounds of Christian religion, though
Christ's identification with the lowly and the lost and his repeated references to the kingdom of heaven, which
is higher than any Kingdom of the earth, clearly mark him out both as a social revolutionary and a political
idealist. Prophet Mohammad (Peace be on his head) took up all that was best in Christianity and Judaism.
The ideas of the unity of God, of Satan, of resurrection, of a Father in high heavens and His Prophet who
stands as a pledge for redemption at the time of resurrection, of rewards and punishments in heaven and hell,
of staunch opposition to image-worship, and of a transcendent, just, yet merciful, God, were already very
much in vogue both in the Christian and the Jewish worlds on the birth of Islam. Large portions of the
Old Testament are reproduced in the holy Quran, especially those about Genesis and Exodus and stories
relating to Noah, Abraham and Moses.

Allah, the name of God made current by the Prophet, was already accepted as the name of the only
deity that the Arab tribes then worshipped. The Prophet made Allah the God of the Muslims all the world
over. His mercy was to be on men of the faith everywhere and He was to take special care of them as
against His enemies, the infidels, who did not belong to the faith. This in all essentials is the jealous God of
the Hebrews, though not of one nation, but of all Muslims everywhere irrespective of their nationality, colour
or station in life, The immediate acceptance of the martyrs in His Cause in heaven and of His enemies in
hell was an imprcvement made by the Prophet on the old notions of the doomsday and the resurrection.

Page 2
[ XXIM J

The pilgrimage to the Macca was already an established custom with the Arabs, The Prophet made,
it obligatory for all the Muslims wherever they Were. “The sacred stone, or the Sang-i-dowad, which the
Arab pilgrims used to kiss at the time of their visit fo Macca, was allowed to remain there, and still is,
The custom of circumcision and the abhorrence of swine were Jewish in origin. The Zakat (or the charity
Jevy) had its corresponding system in the tithe of Christianity. The fasts to be kept in the month of Ramzan
were so popular even before the Prophet Mohammad amongst the Christian monks, and the Hindus and
the Buddhists (as they still are) that one need not doubt their certain influence on the Islamic code of con-
duct in this respect, Though asceticism was never a-part of this religion, which was even to be spread (and
was) with the help of the sword, and earthly activity was not only not taboo but a thing to be coveted and
cherished, immediately after the death of the Prophet the Sufis took to it with such gusto that the influence
of Neo-Platonism, of Vedant, Vaishnavism and the Hinyan School of Baddhism is clearly marked on their
thought and way of life,

The sabbath day observed by the Christians on Sunday, and the Jews on Saturday, was transferred
by ihe Prophet to Friday.

Unlike Christ, however, socially and politically, Mohammad was a great revolutionary. He not only
united all the Arab tribes, but gave new hope to the downtrodden mankind to join his fraternity as equals,
Though he acquiesced in slavery and polygamy, he advocated human treatment both of women and slaves.
He enjoined upon his followers to desist from adultery, dishonesty, covetousness, killing (‘except for just
cause”) and “avenging the murder of one man with the killing of the slayer but no more” (unless murder
is compromised by payment of fair compensation). The system of compensating Women on being divorced,
the right of divorce granted to men, penance for violation of an oath, and fighting with back to the wall
for a righteous cause, were his other notable contributions to social life.

Thus, Prophet Mohammad’s contribution to the religious idea was more on the politico-social plane
than on the spiritual or philosophical. And yet such was the powerful impact of his teachings on a half-
nomadic people, divided into sect and clan, that not long after his death, their camp had swelled to formi-
dable proportions and they overran not only North Africa, but also large parts of Europe and Asia.

When, however, we come to the Indian family of religions, namely Hinduism, Buddhism and Sikhism,
we enter upon a new world altogether. In the Vedic times, Hinduism (or strictly speaking, Brahminism)
inculcated worship of the powers of nature personified as gods whose abode is the high heaven but whose
function is to fight out evil on earth. Hence, they are propitiated, prayed to, and worshipped with an
elaborate ritual. Even sacrifice is offered to them in order that the crops yield good corm and men stay in
health and are saved the fury of famines, floods and epidemics, The gods, jealous, power-hungry and warlike
even fight among themselves and though merciful to the penitent, they punish the evil-doer with extreme
severity and use every weapon to bring their rivals to their knees, Yajaas are, therefore, performed to
seek their protection and receive material benefits from them. And the more one gives to these gods, the
more they are inclined to give back, Not unnaturally, therefore, the earlier polytheistic religion of the Vedic
times led to the glorification and perpetuation of the priestly class, the Brahmins, who alone were
authorised, and competent, to conduct the religious service according to the exact ritual laid down in the
Vedas and in the language understood and appreciated by the gods. .

But centuries before the birth of Judaism or Christianity, the Hindu mind had revolted against poly-
theism and sought, through the Upnaishadic creed, to emphasise the nothingness of life, and the eternity and
the universality of an Over-soul which indeed was identified with the human soul itself. ‘“What is this mean-
ingless game of coming and going, and feeding our wants and propitiating this and that god to gain secular
ends, and to kill and rob and be killed and robbed in order that we may live well for a brief span of time”,
the Hindu mind had asked itself, and found an answer that the goal of man's earthly sojourn was not to
degrade himself to the level of the animal but ‘to realise in himself his inner spiritual nature by curbing
earthly activity which was the cause, or result, of desire, and by self-discipline, enter into the realm of Bliss
to find that “I am He", Thus do one's comings and goings cease, which indeed are the result of our cravings,
for the evil we do in one life is visited in its result wpon us in another birth, To get release from the vicious
circle was the be-all and end-all of our earthly life. And to this now men dedicated, whether through
Karma-Marg (the way of disinterested works) which men of the world followed mostly through sacrifice,
alms-giving, pilgrimages, service of the poor and the wise, and so on, or.through Jnana-marg, that is to say,

Page 2
Page 25

[ XXIV ]

by renouncing earthly activity and by reaching through YOGA or philosophical analysis, a stage in spiritual
development when for man there is no higher ideal than to BE HIMSELF, This indeed was salvation or
Moksha, Whether there was a personal God, or a spiritual God, or no God at all, and whether Prakrifl
(Primal nature), itself an uncaused cause, created the Universe to merge in the Purusha, its ideal, or a God
created the Universe for his own J/eela (sport), the goal of life was to be the same. No idea of moral or
social, much Jess political, reform or revolution was envisaged in this system of philosophy. For, men came
to this earth to reform themselves and not to reform, or to serve or save, others. Hence proselytisation
through the sword, or even by persuasion, was repugnant to the Hindu mind. And to an unfit (Un-adhikari)
person, lesson in religion was never imparted, even if he begged for it,

When, in the days of the Epics, wars grew fiercer, and the system of caste was firmly established,
with women thrown more and more to the background, like the Shudras, the gospel of the Bhagwad Gita
gave men a new hope in that in doing one’s duty (in war as in household, as a Brahmin or as a low-caste
untouchable) with faith in the inevitability of God's Will, like the wheel of Karma, one would be fulfilling
one’s destiny. This synthesis between the earthly activity (Karma) and spiritual fulfilment (Yoga), in which
caste was given due recognition, not only re-established the distinctions between high and low, but also
gave a new fillip to Brahminism, ritual, sacrifice, ete., together with belief in the incarnations of God, and
the worship of their images. Against this, Buddhism rose as a mighty protest, It rebelled against ritual
and sacrifice and image-worship, against caste in the body of the monks (though not generally in society),

. against any special language being sacred to the gods and against the existence of sovl or an Over-soul.

How could reincarnation find a place in its system, when there was no God to incarnate itself? To whom
were the sacrifices to be offered when there were no gods to listen to our prayers and when everything that
we reaped in the spiritual sphere was just that what we had sown in our earthly Karma,- Hence, Karma was
the root cause of all evil and sin. But Karma itself was the result of Desire (Tania). And whosoever,
therefore, overcame Tanha, believing life to be an endless suffering, through the eightfold Path laid down

. by the Buddha (Right Action, Right Thought, Right Belief, Right Word, Right Resolve, Right Life, Right

ake

: Endeavour, Right Meditation), would get release from coming and going and enter into the realm of Nirvan

or Non-being. Right Action would obviously obviate violence to man or animal or bird, nay life of all kind.
Even evil was to be paid back in good. Right Belief would make it unnecessary, according to the Buddha, to
believe in anything that cannot be perceived or proved and remains only a subject of philosophical specula-

‘tion. And Right Life would neither tilt towards the one extreme of sensuous pleasure nor to the other, of

senseless asceticism and self-torture, that is to say, would follow a MIDDLE PATH.
But, it would be seen that in its spiritual ideals, Buddhism is nowhere original. Its world view was

: built on the Sankhya system of Hindu Philosophy, including its atheistic creed. The great Buddha also
- accepted the basic premises of the Hindu metaphysics, namely, that Karma leads to transmigration which is

an endless, painful experience to obviate which one’s endeavour should be to attain Nirvan (or Meksha),
This Nirvan was to be achieved through self-discipline and an ethical code of conduct rather than prayer,
sacrifice, belief in the supernatural, or ritual of any kind, And there was no heaven where we were to be

. rewarded for our piety, nor hell in| which we would be punished for our evil. The hell was the endless
" transmigration of the ‘soul’ (which was not-immortal as was the Hindu belief), and heaven the attainment
‘ of the GREAT PEACE, or Bliss, or Nirvan, or the cessation of Desire, or Non-Being, at which stage the

question of ‘enjoying’ eternally a specific state did not arise at all.

Buddhism later split into two great schools— Mahayan (or the Great Path) of prayer and meditation
for the commoners and house-holders, and Hiny4an, or Theravad (School of elders), the Path of renunciation,
for others. But, as man refuses for long to go on believing only in himself without any outside aid superior

~ to, or beyond, himself, whose help he seeks in moments of distress or weakness, the Buddha himself was

transformed into a God, and no founder of religion perhaps has so many of his images worshipped today as
of the great Buddha himself. The Mahayan doctrine also envisaged a Bodhisattva who, after attaining Nirvan,
returns to the world to save mankind. The ideal of Hinydn isthe Arhat whose objective in life is only self-
culture, Zen Buddhism of Japan can hardly be distinguished today from the Bhaksi-marg of the Hindu faith.
Even a Tantric cult has become popular, as in Tibet, which believes in the doctrine of the NAME, or the
Word, whose magic power is considered so great that on its mere incessant repetition, one attains to Nirvda.
[ XXV ]

The Buddha gave always lesser place to women in his order and even asked the monks to beware of
them, though several women later played a noteworthy part in the spread of Buddhism.

But the PEACE that the Buddha's teachings brought to a war-torn mankind, ‘(though it also led to
the emaciation of a race and left it helpless against the incessant invasions that later came from the North- *
West) was something unique in the annals of man. And soon this great religion had travelled to Ceylon,
Cambodia, Burma, Thailand, Afghanistan, China, Korea and Japan.

For historical reasons, Buddhism was driven out of India, nol only because a militant Hinduism
alone could counter the attacks of Islam from the North-West, but also because non-violence to living beings
having been integrated with Hindu life and belief and the Buddha becoming a Hindu god, there was no longer
any need for his special faith being accepted by the common mass, Wherever Buddhism travelled, it accepted
various influences, as for instance, its integration, with the war-like Shinto religion of Japan, in which the
King is worshipped as an incarnation, of God, and the Tanéric cult.as in Tibet, the householders’ cult as in
the case of Mahayan, and the cult of self-centred, self-culture of Theravad as prevailing now in Ceylon ete.

When Guru Nanak (1469-1526 A.D.), founder of the Sikh religion, came on the scene, he had to
contend not only with the rising force of Islam, but also with the three main currents in the Hindu metaphy-
sical thought. These three currents were: Advaitism, Vaishnavism and the Yogic cult, The doctrine of
Advaitism popularised by Shankaracharya postulated that while Jiva (soul), Jagar (world) and Bralim (God).
were one in essence, they appeared distinct and individualised through MAYA (Illusion) and Avidya
(Ignorznce). If Jiva (or the individual soul) was to acpuire Jnana (knowledge of the Real) through suppres-
sion of the impressions or Desire (Fas) by giving up all worldly activity, the identity of the three would
be established. This creed was too intellectual for ordinary minds to grasp and required a discipline of life
too hard to endure. And so, Shankara conceived of an Js/nwara, or a personal God, for worship which, in
the context of Shankara's philosophy, seems so unrealistic. If there is no distinction between the individual
soul and J/sinvara,.to whom is one to pray except to oneself, believing as he does in “I AM He” (Aham

* Brahmasmi) or “That are Thou" (Vatfwam Asi) ? i :

With Vaishnaavism, or the cult of Vishnu, popularly known as the school of Bhakti, in which love-
worship of an incarnation of Vishnu, like Rama or Krishna, was enjoined to the exclusion of Shankar's
Jnana-marg (the way of knowledge), Sikhism had to contend as a very serious rival. For, the cult of Bhakti,
popularised all over India by such well-known Bhakras like Ramanuj, Madhavacharya, Ramanand, Kabir,
Nimbarak, Vallabhacharya, Chaitanya, Namdeva, Chandi Das and Tuka Ram, who though differing here and
there in their metaphysical beliefs (Ramanuj, for instance, believed in qualified monism or Fashisht Advaitvid,
and Nimbarak in Dvait-Advaitism, or dua) non-dualism, Madhavacharya in dualism and Vallabha in pure
non-dualism), they all believed that it was through love-worship of Vishnu in the form of any of his incarna- .
tions that deliverance from the cycle of Karma and transmigration could be achieved. The Bhaktas, however,

did not repudiate either the authority of the Vedas, nor idol-worship except in individual cases like Kabir, .
nor renunciation of the world. Kabir approved of the life in the family as well, as even though the Bhaktas :
ridiculed the distinctions of caste, they set up a ritual so elaborate for worship that the priestly class could a

not be dispensed with

The Nath Yogis, to whom there are numerous references in the GURU-GRANTH, were ascetic
nomads wearing a mendicant’s garb and exploiting spiritual and physical discipline to perform miracles.
Their creed being an amalgam of Shaivism, Buddhism, the Yoga of Patanjali and Vedantism, their popularity
was, therefore, wide-spread’. They were supposed to live on air, fly like birds in the skies, bury themselves
underground and yet keep alive through the control of the breath, become invisible, and so on, which not

I. The Kanpattis, according to J. N. Farquar (Aeligious Literature of India) derive their system from the Nathas
some of whom are still Shdkatas (worshippers of Shaki). According to Gorakh Bodh and Hath Yog Pradipkd they believe
in Shiva as Supreme God, and also that the world is suffering, that emancipation from worldly existence is the goal and that
this is to be achieved in the form of union with Shiva the means for which is (0 practise Heth Yoga which may be described as
follows : According 10 Gerakh Bodh, the. vital air resides in the circle of the navel (nbAl} and is supported by the void
(Shanpya) which is spread everywhere. In its turn, the vital air vivifies the Manes which resides in the heart. The Afdnas

. is open to the influence of the moon (Chandra) which resides in the sky, and the vital air to the influence of the sun (Sarya)
and void to that of Time (Kea/a). There is another clement, the Word (Shabd), which resides in form (Reap). Before coming
into existence of heart, navel, form and sky, the Manas was contained in the void, the vital air was: less (Nirdkdr), the
Word informed and the moon resided in the intermediate space between heaven and earth. The void is of four kinds : Sahja,
Anubhava, Préna and Atit Shunya and it is to it that vital spirit (Prana) resorts in deep sleep or dea

Page 2
[ XXVI ]

Unnaturally had a greai fascination for the average mind’. Their blessings were, therefore, eagerly sought.
by the householders and their curse avoided at all costs,

Kabir, whose name was a household word, when Guru Nanak started preaching his Gospel, had
indeed emphasized, before Nanak, some aspects of spiritual and moral life, which the Guru also did later,
For instance, he fought the distinctions of caste with ruthlessness, as his Word testifies, preached the oneness
of Hindus and Muslims, and even tolerated the life of the household. But then he remained a true
Vaishnavite in other respects, a believer (though not wholly) in Vedic authority? and the mythology of the
Puranas. He accepted the validity of the incarnation of God as Rama, and regarded life as misery from
which release could be attained only by repeating the name of Rama. ;

Sikhism accepted some of the basic doctrines of Hinduism, enlargening and deepening their meaning,
and rejected others which were out of harmony with an integrated view of life, The end of life remained, as
with the Hindu, release from the bondage of ‘coming and going” or Moksha of Nirvan, but the meaning
of these, as we shall sce later, was transformed. The cause of this “coming and going’ was Karma, or deeds
wrought in a previous birth, but the writ of Aarma could be erased here in this one human life by the Grace
of one Personal-Absolute God, which was to be invoked not merely through the way of Works (Karma-miirg)
or the way of Knowledge (Jndnd-marg) but through His love-worship by dwelling upon, and following, the
WAY of the NAME', as enshrined in the Guru's Word*, Wot through renunciation, but by
actively participating in the activity of life yet not being attached to, or involved in it, was the culture of
the NAME to be imbibed by man*, And this way was open to the woman as much as to man, for both
were equal in the eyes of God. No particular language was sacred to Him but that which men learnt with
the mother’s milk ; no priest or intercessor was necessary Lo imitiate one into the realms of God. Im the
Guru's Word itself was enshrined the WAY which, like the national highway (gaddi-rah), was open to anyone
who cared to tread it, irrespective of his caste, birth and station in life. The acceptance of the authority
of the Vedas was no more relevant, for it was not the mental acceptance of Truth, but true living that led to
one's release’, As our relationship with God was personal and intimate’, there was no need for Him to be.
reincarnated in the human, or angelic, form ; hence the worship of any incarnation of Vishnu was supers
fluous and unrealistic,

Thus, it would be seen that the Sikh religion is strictly monotheistic, believing in nothing but the
one Supreme God, Absolute yet All-pervading, the Eternal, the Creator, the Cause of causes, without enmity,
without hate, both Immanent in His Creation and beyond it, It is no longer the God of one nation, or of
one religion, and his distinguishing feature is that He is no more a jealous or merely a just God, but the GOD
OF GRACE. That being so, He creates man not to punish him for his sins, but for the realization of his
true purpose in the cosmos and to merge in from where he issued forth, The earth, therefore, becomes
sanctified, being the “Abode of the True One™, for how could that who is eternally true create something
which is eternally false or illusory ? We see neither God, nor His Creation, in its true light, because we are
enveloped by MAYA (the Great Illusion) which individualises our personality and gives us the feeling of
‘J-amness." But wherefrom has MAYA descended ? It, too, is the creation of the self-same Supreme GOD,
for darkness is nothing but the other side of the light, and yet how could we distinguish between light
and darkness without knowing, and coming to grips with, either? And yet, when through the love-worship

1. “The Sakiic Yoga i is similar to Havh Yoga but is based on the principies of sound (Shebd), There are many channels
of this Shated, je aclearific & asis of which is the air in our nerves (marl Three such nerves have been mentioned in the
Granth—ird, Pingalé, Sushmana, The last is the most important, being " onnected with the spina] cord. Connected with
these channels, there are six centees or circles of occult force Situated in the human trunk, one the other. Each of
these circles is described as the lotus. Mfuldhdrd, the lowest and the most important of ull, contains Brahma in the form of a
linga and the Devi lies asteep, coiled 34 times round the finga like a serpent. In this posture, she is called Kunda/ini, the coiled
one. By Saktic Yoga, she may be waked and induced to ascend to the ighest chakra, These channels and centres form the
basis of all miracle-working powers which the initiate can achieve.
2. “ied Katth Kaha Mar Jhuthé, Jhuthd Jo Na Bichdré!" (Kabir) ;

3. “Thow mountest then to the Lord's Castle within thyself and attainest Bliss spontaneously, and then there is no
coming back (to the world) again. (Gauri Poorbi, M. 5)

4. “He who, by the Lord's Grace, is imbued with the Name, enters the Fourth State and attains Release."*

(Sukfmani, M. 5)

5, “The Guru's Word Pervades the world ; from the Word one Realises the Name." (Maru, M. 3)

6. “Enveloped by Maya if one keeps one’s mind in God, he finds the Way of (true) Yoga." ‘(Swhi, M.)

7. “Truth is above everything, but higher still is true living.” (Sri Rag,

8. “Thou, O Lord, art our father and mother, we are thy children.

It is by Thy Grace that we find Bliss.” (Suwkhmani, M. 5).

Page 2
{ XXVII ]

of God, our Ego is merged in God's Will, our passions and cravings like lust, anger, greed, attachment,
and pride vanish, the sense of duality between ‘I’ and ‘He’ is lost, and we work and move in the Lord's Being
and accept joyously HIS WILL in whatever happens (for nothing happens which is not according to the
eternal, universal laws of God) and so we merge in Him whose sparks we are, Man does not become God,
only the spark of fire merges in the fire, as the wave merges in the expanse of the sea, As Ego is at the root
of our separation from God, we are neither to work for personal salvation nor work it out single-handed,
alone, like ascetics. In the first place, we work for it as householders and as men of the world, and on the
other hand, we have to join the society of the saints (Sadh Saneat) so that even our honest living, or meditation,
or service of the others, does not degenerate into another kind of ego.

The silencing of desire (or Trishna) seems an echo of Buddhism, as do the terms like Nirvan (Nirbdn
in the Guru's terminology) and Sagar (Sangha). But the Buddha himself, as we have seen, built his religion
on the premises of Hindu metaphysics. However, in the Sikh faith, Nirvda is no longer extinction of one’s
personality, nor an endless Bliss in the high heavens, but it is submission of one’s Ego to the God's cosmic
Order (or Will, or Hukwnr), in order not that one may retire from the world's activity, but serve and share in
a never-ending state of equipoise, no longer being led by the triple kind of activity in which the rest of
the world js grossly involved. Similarly, the doctrines of Karma, the existence and transmigration of the
soul and Moksha, the world’s envelopment by Maya and the three Modes, and the need for equipoise (Sahja)
and entering into the Turiya or the ‘Fourth State’ seem to be derived from the Upnaishidic doctrines. The
idea of the immanence of God is Aryan and of His Transcendence Semitic. The terms like Panch Shabd,
Aunhad Shabd, Jog, Dasam Dudr (the tenth Door), etc., are Yogic in origin. The love-worship through the
Name isan echo of the Bhakti cult. And the doctrine of Grace seems Christian in origin, though the Sufi
and the Vaishnavile creeds also echo this idea.

But it is conveniently overlooked that Sikhism differs from other religious systems in its basic postu-
Jates. The postulates of both Hindu and Buddhist creeds are that the world is suffering and the highest
end: of life is 19 secure release from its snares ; and secondly, that this release can be secured through self-
culture, abandonment of desire in one’s own self rather than by flowing out of oneself to serve or save, or
share one’s Bliss with, others. As the law of Karma is inexorable and visits upon each person according
to his deserts, there is no one outside of us, who can stand as our pledge, like the Christ through his
own sacrifice ; il is in each one of us that the Christ has to be crucified before one is released into a blissful
heaven from where there is no coming again, If, as in the case of the Vaishnavites, the Grace of Vishnu or
his incarnations is invoked, it is again to salvage an individual soul rather than a corporate society.

As against this, the postulates of the Semitic religions are that life is born out of the FIRST SIN,
and though this Sin can be redeemed and ought to be redeemed, it can be done only through belief in the
God's own son who sacrificed himself in order that the mankind be rid of an eternal damnation; or in the
God's Prophet who, on the day of resurrection, will stand witness to the faithful being separated from the
faithless, the faithful thereafter entering paradise and the others hell, two eternal verities from which there
is no escape for anyone, as there is no birth after this birth according to these creeds.

The two basic postulates of Sikhism, on the other hand, are that life is not sinful in its origin, but
having emanated from a pure source remains pure in its essence even in life’, If impurities gather round it
on account of ignorance or MAYA (delusion) these can also be be washed away and lo, one sparkles forth
as pure as he was in his origin?. Secondly, the world is not suffering either, but the “Abode of the True
One™ and “a Garden pf flowers where life is ever in bloom’. Undoubtedly, it is transitory for an individual,
but then this is the onjy opportunity also for man, “to meet his God*” and to pull out all the weeds of evil,
no matter where grown, in one’s own consciousness or out of oneself, in one clime or another, in this race
or that, and of whatever hue they are—social, moral, intellectual or political, A man thus becomes a con-
scious gardener to tend the nursery of God, a wrestler to fight the ‘Five’ within and as many without®, a rider
who rides to his God in healthful joy, singing the wedding song, like the bride who rides to his spouse's

1. “O mind, thou hast emanated from the Light of God ; Know thy essence." (4sa, M. 3)

2. “O- my body, when the Lord putteth His Light in thee, then thou comest into life." (Rambkall, M. 3)

3. “This world is the Abode of the Truc One, in it the Truc One Abides”. (Rdmkali, M. 3)

4. “Thou hast come into a man’s body, this is thy only opportunity to meet thy God.” (sd, M. 5)

5. “Lam the wrestler of God ; meeting my Guru, ibe plume of my headgear flutters." (Sri Rag, M. 5)

*

Page 2
| XXVIII J

home!, For, the God that the human soul seeks is not merely a God of mercy, or even a distant beloved
to be prayed to and supplicated before, but an all-too-human God, hungering to receive His youthful bride
_ in His soothing arms*, Not for nothing is the analogy of the bride and the groom, of the Parents’ home
i and the In-laws, employed over and over again to express the idea of the individual soul and the Over-soul,
of this world and beyond.

Not only the whole of Sikh philosophy, but the whole of Sikh history and character, flows from these
two postulates. Asccticism is naturally a taboo to this system, as much as the distinctions of caste, colour,
race or sex. Life was given us to be wholly lived, not to be thrown away, and living is living in its fulness
not in compartments. The same person is the devotee of the Supreme as well as a house-holder, a peace-
maker as well as a wielder of the sword. May he be a farmer or a shopkeeper, an artisan or a prince, yet
also he is a priest unto himself. He is no longer merely the disciple of his Guru, but also his mentor. After
being initiated into the faith by the Master, he initiates him in turn into the order, No food is forbidden
him, but that which creates in him evil or pain®, No dress is taboo to him but that which leads to sin and
sorrow. No language is particularly his, or his God's, but that which men speak anywhere from the heart.
No caste is high or low, nor no man a condemned sinner or a sanctified being, but he who is so adjudged
in the Court of his Lord‘, Who are we mortals to sit in judgment upon other mortals? At no time in the
history of the world have men suffered so much to protect the faith of ‘others’ nor accepted the validity of
other faiths with that catholicity as the Sikh faith. No other faith has raised to the level of its own
scriptures utterances of divinity by men of diverse creeds. Toleration of another view-point is different ; its
integration with the spiritual life of a creed is a mew experiment in the history of religion. And for the
Protection of no faith, men of other creeds fought so zealously as for the Sikh faith. ;

And the One Personal-Absolute God of Sikhism is also all-embracing and whole in His Activity and
Being. He is transcendent and yet immanent, He is the God of all humankind, nay of the whole universe,
He it is who created what He created, and how and when He Willed. He is the source of good as well as
evil, for if he weren't so, he would not either be almighty or self-contained. This evil and good He created

- §0 that we choose gocd and dispel evil. But He Himself in His Essence is nothing but pure and good.
And there is not a trace of jealousy, or fear, or anger, or intrigue or Unjustness in Him. We, therefore,
know what He is and what He intends us to become. We serve Him, not because of any fear of His unjust
wrath nor to secure from Him any secular merit or benefit, but to be like Him, for that verily, as we know

' from the Guru's Word, is our etermal destiny :

“He the Lord is deathless, so ] fear not death,
As He ‘is destroyed not, so | fear not destruction.
Neither He is poor, nor I am hungry,
Neither He is in woe, nor I am in misery.
Neither He is bound, nor am I in bondage.
Neither He hath the toil, nor am | bound to struggle.
As is He spotless, so am I spot-free.
As He is in Bliss, so am I in ecstasy.
As He is worn not by care, $0 am I not in pain ;
As He is stained not, so am I free of stain,
Nanak : by the Guru's Grace, are my doubts and errors gone,
And He and I meeting together have become One", (Asa M, 5)

This God, as has been stated above, is not merely a distant, transcendent God. Verily, He is distant

' too, and unreachable, ineffable, unutterable, indefinable, unpierceable, without beginning, eternal and

“* beyond time and space, ae ever the same, unfathomable, unknowable, beyond the reach of

i. “The body is a mare created b
Riding it, I cross the impassable. ™ (Pastas, M, 4)
2. “Imake myself the henna ;
And the Lord in His Grace Himself grinds it into a paste and applies it to His Hands," (M. 3)
3. “Brother, that food, that pleasure is vain,
Which leads the mind to sin and makes the body writhe in pain." (Sri Rag, M. J)
4. “Who's true, who's false is adjudged there in the Lord's Court,
For, he who goes there alone knows." (Guru Ndnak's Japu)

Page 2
[ XXIX ]

senses, farthest of the far, highest of the high, without religion, race, caste or sex, attributeless, alone, Absolute,
Self-contained, of Himself born, Invisible, known only but intuitively. And yet this is but only His one
aspect. He is One, but also many at the same time. He is farthest of the far, yet nearest of the near.
For, He is also immanent, the all-pervading light and soul, the in-dweller and inner-relisher and knower of
all things, the filler, He is not goodness but good, not kindness but kind, not mercy but merciful, He is
Purusha, the Being, the Presence, the Man, the only He, the eternal Groom of us all who are His brides, human,
with moral, intellectual, emotional, and social attributes. He is not merely the Creator, but He also Wills,
has a discriminating sense of values and judgment}, ts compassionate and just, loves and hugs with a warmth
that drives out all our woes and doubts and sorrows. And being all-wise, he cannot be deceived,

“He is sweet like the ripe dates, like a rivulet of honey®.” “Of beauteous eyes, and sparkling teeth,
of sharp nose and luxurious hair, of golden body, of alluring gait and steps like a peacock’s, eternally young,
whose speech is ever-sweet”, such is this God, according to Guru Nanak. Says he :

“Sweet is the Speech of my Friend and Beloved,

I've seen With care : bitter is never His Word.” /Suhi Chhant, M. 5]

He verily is ever in joy, cool and seated in equipoise, holy and pure, above the three Modes.
And, such a one not merely is our Lord and Master, a5 of the whole universe, but our groom, our
beloved, our friend, our father, mother, sister and brother, even our son. He is our colourful Lord, ever-
fresh, ever-green, like the earth after the rains. He is the ocean of Peace and Bliss. Seeing Him, one is
instantaneously bewitched and Jost in the sense of wonder. That is why, in the Sikh terminology, He is
¢alled “the Lord of Wonder” (ahe-Gurw).

But as He is also the Master and we have to render our account to Him’, even as we do to our father
and friend howsoever generous and kind and forgiving, we have not to take Him for granted. His love is to
be tinged, as is all honest love, with His Fear. For, no love is possible nor desirable in which the beloved
can be dispensed with at will, and hugged only in times of woe, or occasional excitement, or effusion of
emotion. Knowing that He craves us as much as we do Him, that He will forgive us and take us into His arms
anytime we will seek Him out in honest faith, we have ever to keep awake in His remembrance “like a
mother, babe in arm, involved in the household work, yet with the thought of the child ever in her mind; or,
like a woman with a pitcher of water on her head talking to her mates, yet with her mind ever awake to the
Pitcher on the head lest it falls and breaks*,"* We are thus not to be afraid, but to be awake ever to the Ideal
that is our God so that we walk straight in His way, and do not falter nor doubt, nor fall into error or sin,
enveloped as we are by MAYA (Delusion) and Avidyd (Ignorance) and act as we generally do within the
bounds of the three Modes.

As God ts not merely good and beneficent and compassionate and loving, but also the protector and
the destroyer of evil, He is of strong limbs, mighty and brave, the wielder of weapons, a great rider and hunter,
the destroyer of demons, the conscious upholder of the moral law (Dharma), who if He Wills, may turn the
world upside down and annihilate it®, or merge it in Himself, for He is almighty and powerful enough to
do anything. He holds the earth in His Hands, and causes the sky to stand without a support. Nay, “The
sky is His Cap and the seven underworlds His footwear’’. Everything that is, was created by His Will and
works in accordance with that WILL, for that which doesn’t, is destroyed, He is, therefore, the King of
kings, the True King, whose rule is eternally true, the Man of majesty, of splendour and glory, over whose
Head waves the canopy, whose Palace is most beauteously decked with diamonds and pearls and rubies and
jewels, whose Treasure is inexhaustible, whose Court is true, whose Throne is everlasting and immovable,
whose writ runs throughout the universe and is imscribed on all humankind’s Forehead ; whose Banner is

ever aloft, nay, who is all-steel, who first created the double-edged dagger a and then the whole world®,

1. “Ndnak ; He acts as is His Will
And with asense of discrimination too." (Asd, M. 1)
2. Shalokas of Farid.
3, “The Lord will ask thee to render thy account,
He'll face thee with thy deeds." (Far Ramkali, Hl; Shaloka M. I)
4. Nimdev,
4S. “In His Will are men high and low,
As is His Will, so are dispensed Pleasure and Pain.” (Japa)
6 Gury Gobind: Singh, Wor Sri Bhagauti ji ki.

Page 3
[ XXX ]

And yet, He having that much power, never uses it to the disadvantage of the poor, the meek, the
lowly and the lost, For, He wields His Power always and for ever for their eternal good, He is the support
of the supportless (Nirdhdrdn-ddhar), He fills those that are empty, and raises high those that are laid low
by man, He is the destroyer of sorrow and the giver of Peace and Bliss. He is the God of Grace
(Aripanidhi) who gives 50 abundantly that the receiver says, “Enough, no more’. He is the purifier of the
sinners (Patitpavar), the forgiving Lord, who makes us all swim across the Sea of life. He leads us on to
His Path, and, even when we are misled, He instructs us in His Way. For, He isnot merely the Beloved,
but also a lover of those who love Him (Bhagar-Vaehhal), He keeps our honour and no matter how vicious
our past Karma, He wipes the past clean in an instant, if we go to Him in humility, with a sincere, feeling
heart, prayerful, and secking His forgiveness. The law of Karma is no longer inexorable ; one has only to
wish to be transformed, and Jo, there he is, the purest of the pure:

“Nanak : by His EYE OF GRACE, all are blest". (/apu)

What then isthe Name of thisGod? In the GURU-GRANTH, God is remembered by.almost all the
names known to Hindu mythology or scriptures and the Semitic religions, notably Islam. For instance, He
is called Rabb, Aah, Khudi and Mauld with all the attributes that the Quran endows the one Absolute God
with. Similarly, almost all the names current in the Hindu religious lore, like Ram, Bhagwan, Damodar,
Murari, Gopal, Gobind, Girdhari, Gopinath, Shyam, Vasudev, Narayan, Hari, Madho, Keshav, Brahm,
Parbrahm, Mukand, Vishnu, Raghurai, Prabhu, Ishwar, Gosadin, Kahn, Krishan, Govardhan, Bithal, Mohan,
Murli Manohar, Jagannath, Rikhikesh, Narhar, etc., are employed over and over again.

But, as has been stated above, the most common name that comes to a Sikh spontaneously being
sanctified also by tradition is ‘Wahe-Guru’ (The Wonderful Lord). It is thus more the sense of wonder that
is awakened in us at the thought of such a wondrous Being than any other emotion.

How is such a God to be realised 7 It has already been stated that why we realise Him is because
it is our destiny to become like Him. And “‘as one thinks so one becomes”, therefore, this God is to be dwelt
upon every moment through the NAME. What then is the NAME? It is the qualitative expression of
God's personality. The Name is a symbol that treasures within itself all that God is, and is not. Way, it
is that all-pervading spirit, the Bright Essence which informs all life, all creation :

“The Name informs all creatures, all beings,

The Name informs all worlds, all universes.” [Gauri Sukfenani, Af. 5]

Tn this sense, the Name is the all-pervading Spirit which sustains, and gives meaning to, the whole
creation. As Guru Nanak also says in the Japu: “As much as He has Created, that much is His Name.”
Once this Name, this all-pervading Spirit, is realised, one merges in the Being of God, becoming like Him.
The Guru's Word shows the way to the Name, hence the Word is to be uttered, sung, heard and accepting
its Validity, to be dwelt upon and contemplated. The Name, however, is not a mere word to be uttered
mechanically without its essence bejng realised :

“Everyone utlers the Name of the Lord, but by mere utterance one Realises Him not :
When, through the Guru's Grace, the Lord is enshrined in the mind, one gathers the Fruit.”
' [Guyri, M. 3]

* So that the ancient concept of certain specific words and formulas uttered in a special way leading to
Spiritual, or supra-natural, resulis is denounced by the Guru. Similarly, the Yogic way of concentrating on
some concrete object without or within oneself in order ultimately to merge in one’s own Self is rejected here
out of hand. For, the Lord being formless, it is out of tune with the religious spirit to identify Him with a
figure or form. It is, therefore, the meaning of the Word that the mind is to dwell upon, for this meaning
is then to be realised in one’s life. All Kinds of renunciation and mendicants’ garbs and austerity-foods and
self-torture are therefore a taboo in such a life, - For the higher Truth comes only the way of naturalness, or
through balance and poise and not to the inverted, or perverted, soul,

And as mind has a strange fascination for music, the Guru's Word is to be sung to fire one’s mind
with an experience that sinks in the soul, and turning the usual, the habitual tide of the mind, makes the soul
experience the nature of God within one’s emotional self. And, then, this God-nature will outflow into
secular activity as well, deflect man's mind from his immediate environs and personal pulls and passions,
and yoke it to the service of the others in order thal the Name, the all-pervading Spirit, is seen through all

a eo al _e on

Page 3
[ XXXI ]

creation, and, one ceases to act within the three Modes and the veil of Miya is lifted from the mind's eye.
Man repeats this process endlessly, every moment, so that the pulls of the Other do not deflect him from
his Path even for a little while. He does not have to depend upon hearing the Yogi’s ‘unstruck music’
(Anhad-Nid) in order tofconcentrate his mind. The Guru's Word sung to the accompaniment of music in
the society of the saints transports him into the realms of equipoise which itself is the concentration on one
point of the body, mind and soul.

The mere singing or uttering of the Word, however, does not lead to the spiritual realisation of the
One-in-many ot of the God-nature of the Self, so long as one’s physical activity is not guided by a God-
awakened mind, It is, therefore, essential for a man treading the Path to control, not suppress, his five
desires (Lust, Anger, Greed, Infatuation and Ego), for the Sikh Path being the Path of life, has to grapple
with life in all its manifold activity and it can neither dispense with the life of the household, nor altogether
with the humours which constitute its very salt. As Guru Nanak has said :

“Ego is a chronic disease, but its cure is within it." (Var Asa)

For individuation, which is bad in one sense, is efficacious in another in that it is by being a being
that one not only realises and experiences the Bliss of the Fourth State (the Turiya), but also it is through
individuation that one gives it a secular purpose and physical expression. However, when the Sikh realises
the Truth or the essence, he is conscious that it is through the Lord’s Grace that he has been so blest and
not through his individual effort. For, in the ultimate analysis, nothing that God doesn’t do, happens, nor
anything that he does, doesn't. One can become pure and pious and charitable and dedicated but if he
does it all not in the name of God, and to mvoke His Grace upon himself and others, he is only gratifying
his own Ego, and has thus not attained to the Ideal that is God. And this Grace also comes the way of
Grace, that is ‘the natural way’, and not by forcing cither one's own will or God's, “It is the innocent
and not the sharp-witted that God meeteth”’.

The Name, as has been explained above, is a realisation, the coming of God's Grace within oneself
which obliterates the sense of the Other, and makes one not only BE HIMSELF, but be a portion and limb
of God, Like the Vedantist, however, the Sikh does not believe that he ever becomes HE. Nor does he
become a seer, or a witness, unto the play of life thereafter ; he plunges himself into life's activity, believing
all the while that he is acting only as is the Will of the Lord,

In order to hold the mind, the Sikh does not have to control his breath ; he controls his passions by
submitting his mind to the Guru's mind (as enshrined in the Word). The self-ward mind is only to be
turned Godwards, and when that happens, one enters into the realm of Bliss, shedding aj! fears, overcoming
the limitations of the physical vesture, becoming something other than himself, having died to his self,
and becomes deathless he, for, life and death now seem to him but the two ends of the same beginning. For,
merging into wherefrom one issued forth is certainly not death, but deathlessness :

“The ray has merged in the sun, the wave in the sea ;

The light has merged in the Light, and man is fulfilled."*

It all happens thiswise, the natural spontaneous way, the way of Sahja, and that explains why
transformation in Sikhism from man to superman is so very instantaneous. A thug hearkens to the Word,
and is transformed ; the most detestable untouchable becomes worthy of worship ; he not only comes into
his true Self, but also becomes the Guru, the teacher of men, The Throne of the Sikh Gurus passed thus
on to the most worthy of the disciples who, for a major portion of their early lives, had never treaded the
PATH themselves,

It is given in the GURU-GRANTH at innumerable places, however, that the Name cannot be realised
without the Guru, Jt is he through whose Grace the Name is enshrined in the mind. But the Guru must
be the True Guru, and “the True Guru is he who has realised the True One” (Gauri Sukhmani. M. 5). He,
however, does not lead men to his own worship, but to the worship of the One and the only God, But the
Guru is met, says the Word, only if it is so writ in our destiny and it is only the man whose destiny is
awakened that, meeting the Guru, he realises the Name within himself.

Let us, therefore, pause here to elaborate this paint, for it has led to much confusion in the minds
of the seekers, and to the institution of Guruship being revived every now and then, and men abandoning the
true Path, believing that it was not writ in their destiny, for were it not so, they would go the way they ought

Page 3
Page 33

{ XXXII ]

to as is the eternal Will. A belief in the inexorable laws of destiny (Karma) is also thus embedded in men's
minds.

If one studies the Word of the Guru-Granth carefully, and not casually or haphazardly, one finds
that what is called the eternal Writ is the writ of eternal laws ingrained in the being of every man. Nothing
is arbitrary in the world of the spirit, as it often is in the laws of man. But men, constituted as they are,
determine the quality of all laws from their physical experiences and more often than not from their imme-
diate environs. If an innocent man is convicted and the guilty one escapes, it is said to be the result of
Karma or deeds of the past birth visiting upon him in this! So do men also interpret the laws of the soul.

fr

One man has attajned to a state of Bliss and another hasn't, for such was the writ of Karma! [tis true that -

current religious terminology is employed extensively by the Gurus but they invariably give it a distinct
meaning of their own. True, there is an eternal Writ, yet, itis not only eternal but also universal. It is
written on the Forehead of every man, though only some realise it, while others do not. But for both the
Writ was the same ; for it is ingrained in the being of man since beginningless time :

“Dwell thou on thy God who is ingrained in thy body and mind.” Gauri, M. 5]
“Follow thou the Lord’s Will ingrained in thee.” {Guru Nanak, Japuj
“Within thy home is the Treasure, there is nought without,

“By the Guru’s Grace to it thou attainest and the Door opens unto thee.” (4sa, M. 3, Ashtapadis].
“As fragrance abides in the flower,

As the reflection is within the mirror,
So does thy Lord Abide within thee,
Why search Him without 7" /Todi, M. 9]

So that all that is writ and all that is to be realised is within ourselves. The key is the Word, with
it the Door unto the Self opens, and lo, the Soul is instantly illumined. That is the coming of the Name (the

realisation of one’s God-nature) into oneself, like the opening of the blind-folded bud unto the rays of light,

the sudden awakening of the lower self to the higher Self.

It is nowhere stated inthe Granth that there are some who are eternally condemned, and are forbid-
den to seek themselves and so their God, and that till the writ of their past deeds is washed off, there is no
hope of redemption for them. It is true, there are occasional references to God “Himself waking up some
from their slumber, while the others who are awake receive Him not", but that indeed is the tragedy of life.
We do what we do knowingly, or by force of habit, sharpening our wits all the while not only to cheat our
neighbours, but even our God through a show of piety. Others, seemingly asleep, yet innocent of mind and
heart, accept the validity of God and surrender to His Will so spontaneously and instantly that it seems a
miracle has been wrought in their case. In fact, the life of the spirit is a miracle in its every detail, for who
would otherwise negate himself and yoke to the service of another, or withdraw himself from the seemingly
alluring fruits and joys of life and even getting crucified or burnt at the stake or boiled in a kettle, except he
who has scen something higher than what seems and yet is so superficial and transitory. So, the miracle
does happen when a man's nature is turned into God's nature, for God, like man, also expresses Himself
and makes His existence felt. But the Writ is the same for everyone, God being the same for everyone, but
only Ais destiny is awakened on whom is His Grace, and His Grace comes to all who seek it, through
service, humility, by dying to themselves, and yet living so that God's purpose in creating life be fulfilled,

. The fire is locked in the wood, one has only to light it to see. The butter is lying dormant in the curds ;

churn these and gather. He who does not Jook into the mirror will never see his reflection. The deer runs a
mad race after the fragrance of the musk, not knowing that the musk is within him. To know this is to

become ; but becoming is not an end in itself in the Sikh faith. It must be yoked to a social purpose, for ~

such is the Will or the eternal Writ of the Lord for us humans.

The theory of the doctrine of the Word, or the Name, can be explained in metaphysical terms thus.
Not unlike the Christians, the Sikhs too believe that “in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with
God and the Word was God". According to ancient Hindu thinkers also, out of the five elements, namely,
earth, fire, wind, water and aether, the only element that could express the all-pervading nature of God is
atther. And what is aether, but sound, and sound is nothing but a means to convey the Word. Again, as is
the Hindu belief, according to Mimansa, the Shabda (Word, or verbal testimony) is the only infallible means.
{ XXAIN ]

of acquiring knowledge of spiritual truths. (With Mim4nsa, the Word is, however, employed to invoke the
invisible effects of the Vedic ritual), For, the Word is self-sufficient and does not depend on any other
means for its meaning. Being coeval with sound, the Word is, therefore also eternal. For, even before the
Word is uttered, its sound pervades the acther, otherwise it would neither be utterable, nor hearuble. And,
to know of the eternal veritics only the eternal means and premises can lead to tangible results, The
authority of the Word is derived from its being uttered by those who were the direct witnesses of the Truth:
“Hear thou the True Gospel of the True Guru, ©
For, he speaketh what he see-eth."’

The Word, again, can be uttered, sung, heard and conveyed, its meaning dwelt upon and practised,
without any external aids, or garbs, or guidance which have degenerated religious life into ritual or made
men recluses or established the soul as a church. But the Word is one’s constant company, as guide when
awake, as an image when asleep, sinking into our unconscious as much gs guiding our activity at the conscious
level. Being ever the same, the Word is eternally true. Being the same for all alike, its verities are universal,
hence applicable to all, all over. As the Word has significance only in relation to its meaning, and not
sound, languages in which it js uttered, or explained, are equally sacrosanct, for the Word does not depend
for its meaning on any particular garb or verbal expression, being in essence nothing but an image of Truth
which may be painted in any colours so long as its correspondence can be conveyed to another.

As the Name is revealed through the Word, the Word and the Name are interchangeable terms. To
realise the Word is to realise the Name. And, as the True Word leads to the realisation of Truth which is
God, the Name is also the expression of God being His symbol, As God is the God of Will, the Creator
and Doer, He uses the Word, which in other words is His Will, to express Himself. Hence the Word also
is the Will (Hukum). As there was a time, according to the Sikh creed. when there was no creation and
all was enveloped in chaos. then even “His infinite Will was”. And when He willed that there be creation,
Jo, there was the creation, And God being Infinite, His Will also is infinite and there is no, knowing of it
in finite terms. In other words, it can only be described in terms of wonder :

“To think of the beginning (of the universe) is to enter the realm of wonder,

For, even when there was nothing but void, God permeated that void.” /Sidh Gosht, Ramkali, M. 1;
Creating man out of such a spotless state, how could sin attach to him since beginningless time ?

“When the world of form was yet not born,

Where was sin and where was virtue then 7” /Sukhmani, M35]

So that when the Guru speaks of the eternal writ inscribed on the Forehead of man, he means nothing
more than the writ of eternal, never-changing laws ever the same for everyone’. He thereby also refutes the
theory of the original Sin or the doctrine of Karma which too implies that since the beginning of creation,
man has been condemned to the Round for something he did in the past. But the Guru believes that there
was a time when there was nothing but God seated in Himself, in the state of non-willing, non-doing, passive,
but yet potential, endowed with a Will. That being so, the doctrine of the ‘past’ resulting in a ‘future’ stands
self-condemened, for at one time there was no past, present or future. When God Willed, He created the
universe and when such be His Will, He shall absorb it in Himself. Both these activities are not voluntary,

1, That a fatalistic interpretation of Sikhism based on a misreading of the Grunthic terminology like Kerma (au),
éternal writ (da Su), ete., does violence to the Sikh credo is borne out by numerous references in the Guru-Granth, such as:

“That what thou dost ts writ upon thy forehead. :

For, from whom wouldst thou hide thy shame when the Lord Sce-eth all. (.Is@ M. 5, Chhant)

“Good or bad that we do, we reap the reward thereof accordingly.” (Mie alsa MI}

“Why blamest thou others, blame thy deeds ;

For, thou receivest the fruit of what thou sowest.”’ (asd Af. J, Pare’)

“The dream ended like a dream, but what I had atiained (in life) kept my company in the vond,“* (Filtwal, Af. 5)

“The Lord's justice is upon thy deeds ; the rest is all vain pratile.” (Far Sdrung, Mf. 4)

“The Lord driveth thee as is His Will, but His pen writeth as are thy deeds."" (Kir Sdrang, M. 4, Shaloka M, I)

This also reveals that vicarious atonement of sin is not possible according to the Sikh doctrine and that though both
good and evil emanate form the same source, i¢., God's Will, it does not, therefore, lessen individual responsibility to practise
virtue and fight evil. “Nanak : all the evils thou practisest are like chaias round thy neck." (Sorarh, M. I)

And, as has been stated above, all that is unlike God — lust, wrath, greed, unduc atrachment, ego, etc., that lead one to
Oppression or cowardice, injustice or fear, sycophancy or blackmail, over-indulgence or renunciation, enmity or compromise

of principles, is sin.

Page 3
Soce

QWSWELECCCOOUEGRAC OOO 4, Lita tae ee a

Page 35

[ XXXIV ]

but the result of the Will of God, which is writ in eternal terms on the Foreheads of all (where destiny is
supposed to be written, that being the most outstanding, conscious and expressive part of a human being).

Why does God exercise His Will to create a universe and in it the man, the ‘ruler of the earth’? It
is because He wanted to express Himself, His divinity, His prototype in finite terms. And He also created,
by the same Will, the three Modes, Maya, and the sense of ‘I-ammess,’ resulting im evil, and correspondingly
also the Word through which one realises the Name, or the essence of Reality, and, dispelling the spell of
ignorance over him, becomes like Him whose essence he is. But that neither makes him look upon the world
as false (though one’s stay in it is transitory and illusory), nor drives him back into himself having
resolved his Doubt. He lives in the world as a man of the world and acts now not according to his own will
goaded by his self, but in accordance with the Lord's Will, a5 revealed to him through the Name, dying to
one's self and living ever in the Presence of God.

The question is then asked, if that is so, where is the necessity of the Guru on which so much insis-
tence has been placed in the GURU-GRANTH ? But it is never realised that the Guru is not a person, or
an incarnation of God, an intercessor or a prophet or pledge, but the Word :

“The Word is the Guru, the Guru is the Word,
For, all the Nectars are enshrined in the Word.” [Natt Asiitapadis, M. 4]

The Guru only in this sense is the intercessor, who obliterates the evil of the human mind, and illu-
mines it. For, “the True Guru is only he who has realised the True Person.” Yea, it is in this sense that
the Guru and the God are one:

; “The Sublime, the Transcendent, the Yonder of the yond God,
That Guru hath Nanak met.” /Sorath M. 1]
Says Guru Gobind Singh :
“He, who was the only one in the beginning and will be in the end,
That one is the Guru of me.” {Chaupai M. 10}

The tenth Guru, while abolishing succession, said : “The Word is the embodiment of the Gurus. He
who searcheth me, findeth me inthe Word.” For secular matters, however, the Guru is the whole community
of the Khalsa-in-faith. The ‘service’ of the Guru is the yoking of the mind to the Word, and the mind is so
yoked in order to flow out of the self so that the spell of the Other on one’s mind is broken and one see-eth
Him in all, and serveth all, thus merging in the One to whom belong all,

It is thus through the Word that on the Name, or the essence of Reality, being realised, one’s indivi-
dual Karima, which, being habit-forming, leads man instinctively to egotistic activity, and hence evil and sin,
is washed off, and the pure one merges in the Pure one, and thus one realises one’s destiny. But if, on the
other hand, man chooses the way of self-hood which leads to the overpowering of the other creation, he
earties along the load of sin in the form of craving (Trishaa) and so comes and goes, This then becomes
his ‘Jot’:

“That what thou practisest day and night hath been writ on thy Forehead,
For, from whom canst thou hide thy shame when He, the seer, sce-eth all, within thee.”

[Asa M. 3
Thus, in the Path of the Guru no one is eternally condemned nor eternally saved, neither low nor
high, but in accordance with one's deeds is each rewarded or punished in the world of God, that is the Soul:
“The virtuous and the vicious are not mere echoes,
For, one carries along all that one does.” /Japu]

The Chitra and Gupta, which are supposed to be writing out our deeds in an account-book are no others
than the conscious (C/vt) and unconscious (Gupfa) parts of our mind. The Dharmaraja, or the Lord of Law,
to whom we have to render the account is the God-nature (or the Soul) within us. If, therefore, occasionally
we find references to the ‘inexorable writ of Karma’, it means only that the deeds (Kiraf) that we have
done in the past (Poorah) have become our Aarma (destiny or lot) which cannot be erased and would lead
to pleasure and pain, deliverance or transmigration except when one turns away from one's self with a
conscious effort, led by the Guru's Word, with faith in God's Grace, when his old writ is washed off and
one merges one’s will in God's Will. In this state, there is no pain but all joy; no strife, but all tranquility
and equipoise; no coming and going but an eternal, moveless state, and all that happens is good and true,
for jt is now He who moves and does, not me,

i
|
,
Il
The Story of the Sikh Gurus

The word ‘Sikh’ is often interpreted to mean a disciple (from Sanskrit, Shishya), but in actual fact it derives
its origin from Pali and means the same as in the great Buddha's Dhammpad—the elect, or in Sikh parlance,
chosen (by God), God's own. The nomenclature of ‘Khalsa’ which Guru Gobind Singh gave to the brother-
hood of the Sikhs also means the same, being derived from the Persian term then current for King’s own
(lands). Viewed thus, the true purpose of founding the Sikh order not merely as a system of religion but
also as a distinct, because a!l-embracing, social organism becomes manifest.

Guru Nanak, the founder of the Sikh faith, was born in an age af inquiry, not only into the realms
of physical universe hitherto lying unexplored, but also into the inmost nature of man. Man was in search
not only of what lay outside of him, but also in search of himself. Being the contemporary or near contem-
porary of Martin Luther, Columbus, Shakespeare, Wasco-de-Gama, Babur, Kabir and Michaelangelo,
Nanak not merely witnessed the birth of new empires and the discovery of new lands and sea-routes but
also of protest against established dogma and social habits of man, Languages were contending for supremacy
as much as ideas. Art and architecture, music and poetry, theatre and dance were finding new modes of
expression along with tyranny and bloodshed becoming the spearheads of new conquering faiths. Thanks
to the genius of Nanak, he contrary tothe popular belief, did not merely stop short at reform in religious or
social conduct of the individual, but planted the germs of a new people in whom the whole man could find
his self-expression and fulfilment.

Were it not so, the spiritual and social objectives of Nanak would have ended with their enunciation
by him, as in the case of Kabir. No Guru after him deviated essentially from the metaphysical or moral
code laid down by him, but as students of history are aware, the nine Masters, who succeeded him, perfected,
each in his turn, those aspects of life during a period of two centuries which not only gave a new nationality
to the soul of the people, but also made them more broad of limb and mind, and laid the foundations
besides of a secular empire on the ruins of a foreign imperial rule. If Panjab’s earth is more productive, if
its manhood is more manly, if its womanhood is more liberated, if its people are more catholic in dress and
diet-habits, and far less superstitious, and roam the whole world for adventure as for livelihood, all this is
thanks to great Nanak, whose faith works through living life and sustains, broadens and deepens it by giving
it an earthly purpose as much as spiritual hope, A whole galaxy of saints and warriors, patriots and scholars,
martyrs and men of charity was born, Before him, look into the books of history as well as you may, you
do not find any name worthy of notice in the Panjab for centuries before him.

Nanak was born on April 15, 1469, in the light half of the month, though, according to later
chroniclers, his birth took place on the full moon day of the month of Kartik, of the same year, in a small
neglected village called Talwandi (now Nankana Sahib) in the present district of Sheikhupura, forty miles
to the south-west of Lahore in what is now Pakistan. His father, Mehta KAlu, of the Vedi Khatri tribe, was
a village Patwari (record keeper), But notwithstanding his humble parentage, before Nanak breathed his
last in 1539, his name had travelled not only throughout India’s north, south, east and west but also far
beyond into Arabia, Messopotamia, Ceylon, Afghanistan, Burma and Tibet. And all this because he had
chosen to traverse for over thirty years of his life all these lands on foot, accompanied by one of his most
devout followers, Mardana, a Muslim, who played on the rebeck while Nanak sang to audiences of all
creeds and climes.

Nanak was put to school at the early age of five, and he learnt besides Hindi & Panjabi both Persian
and Sanskrit from the village Brahmin and the Maulvi. But, soon, he seems to have despaired of his studies,
for his father asked him cither to farm or tend cattle, or keep a shop. But, says the Janam Sakhi, while he
obeyed his father to do all he wanted, he had his heart centred all the while on the One, Absolute God
(Nirankar) and whenever he was asked what his name was, he would reply, “My Name is Nanak Nirankdri
(Nanak who belongs to the one, Alsolute Lord).”

At a very early age, he seems to have acquired a questioning and an enquiring mind. When,
for instance, he was asked to wear the sacred thread, as is the custom among Hindus, he refused to do so,
saying, “I would rather wear the thread that breaks not, nor is soiled, nor burnt nor lost”,

Page 3
[ XXXVI ]

While out with the cattle one day, says the Janam Sakhi, he fell mto a deep trance, and the cattle
grazed the farm of another. Similarly, when he was sent to buy wares from the market nearby, he gave
away all his money to the hungry, saying. to himself there could be no truer trade than feeding the

{in the district of Kapurthala) to be with Jairim, to whom Nanak's sister, Nanaki, was married. Jairim,
using his influence with the local governor, Nawab Daulat Khan Lodhi, got him employment of a store-
keeper, But, it is said, as Nanak would weigh up the stores and reach at the number “Tera" (thirteen, which
also means ‘Thine’), he would go into a trance and go on repzating “I am Thine, Lord, I am Thine"’.

Jairam advised Kalu to marry Nanak off, so that he might thus be persuaded to attend to the affairs
of the world with greater consideration. At the age of 18, Nanak was married and had two sons from this
marriage, Sti Chand and Lakhmi Das. But even while working to sustain his family, he devoted more and
more of his time to discourses with the wandering Fagirs and Sadhus. It appears, these discussions went a
long way in training the mind of Nanak in the intimate study of comparative religion of which one finds
such abundant proof from his works.

lowly and the lost. Not unnaturally, therefore, his father was furious with him and sent him to-Sultanpur

Having served the Nawab for about 9 years, one morning, as Nanak went to bathe at the river Baeen
nearby, he went into a trance and, says the Janam Sakhi, did not come out of the water for three days.
Here, he felt that he stood before the Throne of the Supreme Being who commanded him to enter upon his
godly mission at once. Thereafter, when Nanak came home, he distributed all he had to the poor and
whenever someone would ask him what he had found, he would answer :

“NA Koi Hindu, Ni Musalman"’.
(There is no Hindu, no Musalm4n.)

His message created a sensation in the town. The Qazi called him to his presence and said, ‘“‘Thou
sayest, there is neither a Hindu nor a Muslim, prove this thou to me, for I am a Muslim and a man of
prayer, and | know that my faith is true. If thou doubtest, come and say thy prayers with me and see’,
Nanak readily agreed, and stood at the prayer amongst the faithful, led by the Qazi. When the prayer was
over, the Qazi said to Nanak, “What sayest thou now ?” Nanak answered, “Thou sayest thou art a man of
prayer. But thy prayer was unaccepted by God, for while thou wert praying, thy mind was in Kabul pur-
chasing horses." The Qazi was amazed at the intuition of Nanak. Then the Qazi asked, ‘‘Who then isa
trué Muslim 7" The Guru answered :

“If compassion by thy mosque, faith thy prayer-mat,
and honest living thy Quran,
And modesty thy circumcision, contentment thy fast,
then, verily, thou art a true Muslim.
Let good deeds be thy Kaaba, and Truth thy Prophet,
and let thy prayer be for God's Grace.
And thy rosary be of His Will, then,
: God will keep thy Honour.” { Far of Majh, M. I J
The Qazi was astonished at his vision and asked, “If there are no Hindus and no Musalmans, what
pray art thou ?”
Nanak answered :
“If I say I'm a Hindu, you are disappointed, but | am not a Muslim either. I am in fact a mere
. may made up of five elements.”
From now on Nanak, now aged 27, entered upon his global mission to instruct and save the world.
He took along with him a Muslim, Mardanad by name, and while Mardana played on the rebeck, Nanak
sang his heart-searching hymns to the people in a language which they spoke and understood.

For sometime, he went about in the Panjab converting Hindus and Muslims to his views and estab-
lishing missionary centres in the charge of his devout followers, many of whom belonged to the low castes
and had practically nothing to call their own, At Saidpur, near Gujranwala, he put up at the house of a
carpenter, Lalo by name, and thus invited the wrath of the high class Hindus. They said, ““This man is

52300 Guru-Granth Saubib

es hits Se

is

COC:

bas

SAS

OOOSESOSECSCSOSHSCOCESHSS

»
[ XAXVIL ]

lowering the esteem of his father’s faith by dining with a low-caste Hindu and keeping. the constant company
of a Muslim drummer,’ One of them, Malik Bhaga, arranged a big feait in honour of his ancestors, and
invited Nanak to partake of it. But Nanak refused to go, At last, the Malik, who was an official of the
local Pathan army commander, asked his servants to bring Nanak to his presence by force. Nanak went
to him and when Bhago Said, “You come not to eat with me and eat with a Shudra, what kind of a man are
you 7" Nanak replied, “In your bread is the blaod of the poor, while the bread of Lalo, who earns by the
sweat of his brow, is sweet like milk.” At this, BhAgo was all the more enraged and asked Nanak to
demonstrate the truth of what he had said. Says the Janam Sakhi, when the Guru pressed in his hands the
bread from cither house, out of Lalo's oozed milk, and out of Bhago’s, blood. Lalo was the first to be
consecrated as a missionary of Nanak’s faith.

From here, Nanak went to Tulamba, near Multan, where he came across a Thug, Sajjan by name. It
was customary for Sajjan to sit outside his door on a prayer mat, rosary in hand, waiting for the wayfarers
whom he would lodge in a temple if a Hindu, and in a mosque if a Muslim. At night, when the guest would
be asleep, he would rob him of his belongings and cut his throat. Seeing Nanak, he said to his associates,
“This man wears a very bright face. I believe, he is very rich.” And so he extended to Nanak all the
courtesies due to a man of substance. At night, when he asked Nanak to go to deep, Nanak said, “I would
first recite a hymn in praise of God and then retire to bed.” And when Nanak sang,

“How bright sparkles the bronze, rub it and it blackens your hand,
Wash it as well as you may, but its impurity goes not,” /Swhi, M, I}

‘a

é)

ey

é)

=]

a

9)

3

Sajjan instantly realised that he had been discoverd, and so fell at the feet of the Master, and begged a
of him to grant him forgiveness. Nanak said, ‘‘Distribute all you have among the poor, and meditate upon
the Name of God,” Sajjan did so, and with him as the priest, Nanak established his first Gurudwara (or

temple) here, (J)

é)

a)

J

all

é)

Thereafter, Nanak, now famed as the Guru (or the enlightener) turned towards the east, and went to
well-known places of Hindu pilgrimage—Kurukshetra, Hardwar, Banaras, Gaya and Patna going as far as
Dacca and Assim: At Kurukshetra, he arrived om the day of a solar eclipse, when millions of devout Hindus
had come to have a dip in the holy tank. It is at Kurukshetra that the Hindu Bible, the Gita, was composed
by Lord Krishna in the midst of a royal battle between the two contending clans, Kaurus and Pandvas, .in
ancient times. Here the Guru, contrary to the practice, cooked meat in a vessel and made it known that he
had done so. The people swarmed in upon him in great rage that on such an auspicious day and at a place
of pilgrimage he had cooked meat to eat! But the Guru, instead of getting provoked, sang the following
hymn :

“Of flesh are we born, within the flesh were we conceived : yea, we are the vessels of flesh.

They the Pundits know not, but pride on their wisdom and sharp wits.””

This argument made the angry pilgrims speechless and they went away cither converted to his views or left
. him alone as being lost.

At Hardwar, on the banks of the holy Ganga, he saw people throwing water towards the east. When
asked what were they doing, they answered, “We are offering oblation to our ancestors in the other world."
The Guru thereupon started throwing water towards the west. When asked what was he doing, he answered,
“Tam a farmer from Kartarpur to the west of here, and [ am watering my flelds over there.” When people
laughed at his innocence, he asked searchingly, “If your water can reach the other world, cannot mine reach
even a corner of this world ?" The people were silenced at this unanswerable logic.

coy tyr

At Banaras, he converted a famed Pundit, Chaturdas, to his faith, leading him away from idol-
worship and the worship of symbols, and inculcating in him devotion to the One and the only God by
dwelling on His attributes and Praise. Chaturdas became an ardent missionary of the Sikh faith. At Gaya,
the Guru converted a jeweller, Salis Rai, and appointed him a missionary of his order, In Kamrup (Assam),
some beautiful women tried to entice him with their charm, but the Guru spurned their magical spell and
made them believe that only that enjoyment was enjoyable which Jasted eternally and that excessive
indulgence in pleasures of the flesii which lasted but a brief moment, was a vain pursuit.

BBISSOCCESGOSS

:
:

a

Page 3
[ XXXVI ]

On his way, he was not well received in a village. This village he blest saying, “May ye flourish
here’. In another village, the courtesies shown to him knew no bounds. This village, he prayed, should
scatter, When Mardan4 questioned him about his strange utterances, he answered, “Those that received us,
not well, let them flourish and be where they are, so that they do not pollute others with their disgraceful
conduct. But those who received us well if they scatter about, would by their example make others also
virtuous and well-mannered.”

On his way back, the Guru halted at Puri, wherein is installed the image of Jagan-nath, Lord of the
Universe. In the temple, the Hindus were performing Arti before the image, going round and round it, carry-
ing caskets in which burnt the earthen lamps, and showering flowers on the idol. The Guru stood silent and
when asked why he was not participating in the service, answered : “This your homage is too small for a
God as high as the Master of the Universe.” And saying this, he sang a hymn in praise of the Supreme Being
which, for the sweep of its imagination, is unrivalled in the whole gamut of Indian mystic poetry. Said he :

The sky is the salver ; the sun and the moon are the lamps,
The spheres of stars are studded in it as jewels ;

The chandan-scented winds from the Malai mountain wave
And scatter across the fragrance of myriads of flowers. [J]
(Thus) is Thy Worship performed,

O Thou Destroyer of fear !

Thy unstruck melody rings

And maketh music of the Word as if on the tender lips of a flute. //-Pawse}
Thousands are Thy eyes, yet hast Thou eyes ?

Thousands are Thy forms, yet hast Thou a form ?
Thousands are Thy lotus-feet, yet hast Thou feet ?
Thousands Thy noses to small, yet hast Thou a nose,

O Wonder of wonders ! /2/

Thou art the spirit that Peryadeth all.

It is Thy Light, that lights all hearts.

Through the Guru’s wisdom doth Thy light burnish,

And that what pleaseth Thee becometh Thy Worship. /3)
(Like the black-bee) I crave day and night for the honey
Of Thy Lotus-feet.

Grant Nanak, the Chatrik, the Nectar of Thy Mercy, Lord,
That he Mergeth in Thy Name. [4-3/ /Dhanisari, M. I]

For sometime thereafter, the Guru passed his days journeying in the Panjab, During these days,
his mectings with Sheikh Brahm, twelfth in the line of the great Muslim Sufi saint, Baba Farid, are very
significant. It was in these days that he founded the city of Kartarpur, or the Abode of the Creator-Lord,
and built a house for his family to live there.

In his second tour to the south, the Guru went as far as Ceylon accompanied by Saido and Gheo

and visited the Raja of Jaffna in this island who had been converted to his faith earlier by one of his
anerchant followers, Mansukh,

Next, he turned his attention to the north in order to discourse with the Yogis in the Himalayas whose
impact was being felt in the Panjab for the last ten centuries. In this journey, he was accompanied by
Hassu, a blacksmith, and Sihan, a washerman. He was robed in clothes of skin. He crossed Nepal and
portions of western Tibet and mounted to the Kailash where he met the Yogi hermits and discoursed with
them, on the frivolity of performing miracles and living like recluses, two planks on which the Yogis’ order
mainly rested. His discourse with them is preserved in the Sidh Goshi. [See Rig Ramkali, M. 1]

Guru Nanak travelled back to the plains of the Panjab via Ladakh, Srinagar, Jammu and Sialkot,
Accompanled by Mardana, once again, the Guru set out upon his fourth journey to the west, and went, among

Guru-Granth Sabi

[ XXXIX ]

other places, to Mecca and Baghdad dressed, as his near contemporary, Bhai Gurdas, says, in blue, like a
Haji, ablution-pot in one hand, prayer-mat in another, and with a BOOK under his arm, as is the
custom among the pious Muslims. ,

At Mecca, says the Janam Saki, he lay down being fatigued im a mosque with his feet towards
the Kaaba, When the Mullah saw this act of sacrilege, he was infuriated and kicked him, saying,
“Knowest thou not this is the House of God, and thou sleepest, thy feet towards the holy Kaaba".
Unperturbed, the Guru quietly answered, “Turn my feet in whichever direction God's House isnot,” The
Mullah was non-plussed, for he too believed, as was written in the Quran, that God was everywhere, in
the north as in the south, in the east as in the west.

Hearing that a strange man had crept into their company, people gathered round him and asked,

“Who is greater of the two, a Hindu ora Musalman?” The Guru replied, “Without good deeds, both
will come to grief." Then they asked him, “Of what religion art thou?" The Guru answered, “I am a
mere man, made up of five elements, a plaything in the hands of God.”

In Baghdad, the Guru had a discussion with Shah Bahlol, a Muslim divine, and left him a great
admirer of his, for Shah Bahlol built a memorial to mark this visit on which the following inscription
still stands : .

“In memory of the Guru, that is the Divine Master Biba Nanak Fakir Aulia, this building has been
raised anew, with the help of seven saints.” It is dated 927 Hijri (1520-21 A.D.)

When the Guru returned to the Panjab via Kabul, visiting Hasan Abdal on the way, where to-this /
day there is a shrine standing to his memory, called Panja Sahib (for there is a hand-mark inscribed in stone
which is believed to-be Baba Nanak’s), Babur had invaded the Panjab for the third time. The Guru was now
at Saidpur staying with Bhai Lalo. A wholesale massacre of the inhabitants of the place ensued to which
the Guru was an eye-witness. The Guru wrote some of the most patriotic and soul-stirrimg verses at this 2
time and even asked his Gad, ;

“When there’s so much of bloodshed and people groan, 3
O God, thou feelest no pain ?
A deadly lion hath pounced upon a herd of cows,
and Thou, the Master, carest not 7"
-Here, the Guru was arrested, along with others and was made to grind the corn, but, says the Janam
Sakhi, he was soon released with honour.

The Guru now settled at Kartarpur with his family as a farmer, where he was joined on also by
r.}

t

tb

several of his followers, including Bhai Lehna (later called Angad), a worshipper of goddess Durga who was
converted to his views and stuck so faithfully to him and served him with such humility and grace that the
Guru, breathing his last in 1539, anointed him as his successor, disinheriting his two sons. It is at
Kartarpur that the institution of free kitchen was first established and whosoever came to see the Guru,
partook of it irrespective of his caste, creed, sex or station in life, Not only the poor and the downtrodden
of the land, but he also liberated the womankind to make woman an equal partner as much in social
affairs as in spiritual hope, When Guru Nanak died, a quarrel ensued between Hindus and Muslims, each
party claiming that the Guru belonged to it and so his last rites should be performed according to the
tenets of its faith. But, says the Janam Sakhi, the wise of both the communities settled the dispute thiswise
that both should place their flowers on the body of Baba Nanak and whichever party's flowers would wither
away last, would be entitled to claim his body. Next morning, the flowers of either party were as fresh as
the night before, and so both decided to divide the sheet covering his body, the Hindus burning it and the
Muslims burying it, for, says the Janam Sakhi, his body in the meantime had disappeared into the realm of
God, carried by angels from the high heavens. ‘

Nanak was thus not merely a Bhakta, or a detached devotee of God, but a man deeply involved
with the affairs of the world. Not only a great poet, musician and philosopher, but also a city-builder, a
social and political rebel, an integrator of warring creeds and the creator of the NEW MAN in the New world
supported by a new morality and a God that not only punishes and rewards, but also reclaims and redeems
both man and his society. For, it is Nanak who calls the earth the ‘seat of Dharma’ (or the Moral Law)
and man the expression of God’s highest Grace.

1. A Short History of the Sikhs, Gansta Singh and Teja Singh.

3
4
4
2
2)

Page 4
Gora Angad (1504-1552)

Born in Matte-di-Sarai in the Ferozepur district in a very poor family, he was 45 when he came to
the Throne of Nanak.

He continued the work of Guru Nanak for thirteen years after him. His chief contribution to the
Sikh movement was his insistence on absolute surrender to God, humility and dedicated service of humanity.
It is recorded that it was he who gave vogue to the native script of Panjabi, Gurmukhi, and got the sayings
and a biography of his Master written in this script, though the script was known and widely used even
before him by the Khatris for keeping their accounts. Before him, Guru Nanak too had rejected Sanskrit,
in preference to the indigenous spoken languages of the people, Panjabi and Hindi, as the great Buddha had
done before by making Pali, then the vernacular of North India, the vehicle of his message, This dealt a
severe blow to the hereditary priestly class.

Guru Angad was a married householder before he was converted to the new faith, and had two
daughters and two sons, After he ascended to the Throne of Nanak, his wife, Khivi, served in the
community kitchen, he himself living on coarse bread earned by him by twisting moonj.

Along with his spiritual mission, he inculcated in his people the love of sports and organised wrest-
ling bouts for the youngsters.

A man of great forbearance, he once reprimanded Amar Das, his devout follower, for giving his
approval to the violence the villagers indulged in against a monk who was very jealous of the Guru’s repute
and incited them to de violence to the person of the Guru. Guru Angad said to Amar Das, “You should
endure what is unendurable, suffer what is insufferable. You should have endurance like the earth, stead-
fastness in joy and sorrow like a mountain, and have pardon in the heart like the river.”

Like Guru Nanak, he too put his sons to a severe test, but finding them wanting, he consecrated
Amar Das, his devout disciple, to be his successor.

Guru Amar Dis (1479-1574)

Born in Basarke, in the District of Amirtsar, Guru Amar Das was a farmer-trader and a strong
Vaishnavite before he met Guru Angad at a fairly advanced age. He used to visit the places of Hindu
pilgrimage every year. He too was a householder, and had two sons and two daughters. Hearing once the
Word of the Guru being recited, he expressed a desire to see the Guru and when he did so, he offered
himself body and soul to the service of his Master. He would fetch water for the Guru from the nearby
river each morning in spite of his old age, and served him so well that Guru Angad, leaving out his sons,
appointed him to be his successor.

His contribution to the Sikh moyement was manifold. He not only extended the institution of the
community kitchen, but also fought against Purdah and Sati. He collected the works of his two predecessors
and pot them written out by his grandson, Sahsar Rim, in two volumes, which later formed the main source
for the compilation of the Guru-Granth. He also added some of the sayings of the Hindu Bhaktas to these
volumes, adding his comments wherever he differed from them.

Hearing his repute, even Akbar the Great came to visit him, and offered a handsome grant for the
community kitchen, but the Guru declined the offer, saying, “The Guru's kitchen must depend on small
voluntary offerings of the devotees and not on the imperial gifts”, He had also to contend with hostility
from Guru Angad’s son, Datu, and Guru Nanak’s ascetic son, Sri Chand. People were being attracted, as.
they often are in India, to the asceticism of B4ba Sri Chand, to which the Guru was leading a strong oppo-
sition. But the hostility of Datu tecame so prorounced, that the Guru had to sometimes to bear the
untearable. Once Datu came to see him and kicked him off his seat, but the Guru was unprovoked, and
started pressing the feet of the offerder, saying, “I am old, my bones are dry and hard. Your tender feet
must have been hurt by them”.

Guru Amar Das founded the city of Goindwal and dug up a well here with 84 steps leading down
to it. He visited the places of Hindu pilgrimage as a Guru and preached to large audiences the meaning of his
new mission, His faith had now spread far and wide and to minister to its needs, he established 22 seats
(Manjis) for missionary work and appointed one of his leading followers to be incharge of each. It was he

wD AI aN DP PD AD a Di Ned TD) @uru- Granth Sahib
who initiated reform in the marriage and death ceremonies, making both these occasions for quiet recitation

of the Name of God,
Guru Amar Das’s compositions in the Guru-Granth are known for their simplicity of language and

idiom and for the thoroughness of interpretation of the metaphysical terminology used therein.

Guru Amar Das also emphasised the need and sanctity of secular activity amongst his Sikhs. When
Gango, a Khatri, came to see him and asked, “What shall | do to save myself,” the Guru replied, “Go and
open a bank at Delhi and dwell upon the Name of God.”

Gura Rim Das (1534-1581)

Scion of a humble family, Ram Das (earlier called Jetha) was born at Lahore, He used to sell boiled
and sweetened wheat to the pilgrims at Govindwal outside the Guru's house. His spare time he would devote
to the service of the Guru in the construction of a well (Baoli) in which the Guru was engaged in those days,
Finding him young, handsome and obedient, the Guru married his eldest daughter, Bibi Bhani, to him and
finding his sons careless and impudent, he appointed him to be his successor. There is in his compositions, 4
included in the Guru-Granth, such sincerity of emotion and beauty and freshness of rhythm, that one is in e
fact amazed at his poetic faculty. rah
Besides, he was a great builder, and founded the city of Ramdaspur, now called Amritsar. In 1577, 8
he obtained a grant of the site together with 500 bigh4s of land, from the Emperor Akbar, on payment of
Rs. 700 Akbari to the Zamindars who owned the land. He invited traders from all over to come and settle 9
here. Today, this is a most prosperous business centre of North India. The Sikhs now took more and Bf
more to business and-trade, and even though they knew that secular activity in their faith went hand in Q
hand with spiritual discipline, and they, therefore, not only kept the household, but also farmed or traded to 3
make a living, they had, for the first time, found a centre of trade being established by their Guru, where
they could congregate to be near him as well as create wealth. - 3
The Guru asked his Sikhs to help each other in founding business houses and pray for their success. 3

The Sikhs from now on remained no longer small farmers or petty shopkeepers, but went as far as
Kabul to buy and sell horses, and became jewellers, embroidery workers, carpenters and masons, bankers
and wholesalers.

This shift, as we shall see later, stood the community in good stead in times of stress and tribulation.

Guru Arjan (1563-1606)

The youngest son of Guru Ram Das, a poet of great excellence, a philosopher in his own right, a
builder and great organiser, and the first martyr in Sikh history—this was Guru Arjun. Even in his early
years, he showed signs of great promise, faithfulness to the ideals and a balanced mind towards his
detractors, one of whom was his eldest brother, Prithi Chand, who did his worst to harm him in order to
usurp the Throne, but who was paid back in nothing but forgiveness and charity, The other brother of
Guru Arjun, Mahadev, was a recluse and was hence considered unfit to succeed his father:

Though Sikhs stood by Guru Arjun and sent in their offerings to him from far and near, these
would hardly reach the Guru for they were intercepted on the way by Prithi Chand, even though the Guru
had already assigned all income from the house property to his name and for himself and the communily-
kitchen, he depended only on the offerings of the faithful,

To safeguard against it, the Guru appointed some of his trusted Sikhs in various places to collect
the offerings from the faithful, who were required from now on to set apart one-tenth of their incomes for
communal purposes. These collections were to be offered to the Guru on the day of Baisakhi each year by
the Masands (or Agents of the Guru).

In the heart of the city of Amritsar, Guru Arjun built a temple, now popularly known as the Golden
Temple, open on four sides to signify that it was open to men of all the four castes and to men from all
the four directions of the world, It is said, he asked a Muslim Sufi sain, Mian Mir, to lay its founda-
tion-stone, Later, the Guru built the cities of Tarn Taaran and Kartarpur, now in the districts of Amritsar:

‘ Guru-Grmth Sahib 9909999099999999999999999999999999990229999900

§ sowoscereecgeasecse EEE Eat ntyt

Page 42
[ XLII ]

and Jullundur respectively. Round the temples at all these plaées, the Guru dug up huge tanks for people
to bathe, and keep themselves meticulously clean,

When in 1595, a son was born to Guru Arjun, Prithi Chand, who was hoping that, the Guru being
childless, the Throne would pass on to him or to his son, started indulging in even viler intrigues. At first,
he tried to poison the Guru's son, but failing in this he joined hands with a Muslim governor -of Jullundur,
Sulhi Khan, and incited him to attack him. But Sulhi died in most tragic circumstances much to the great
chagrin of Prithi Chand. , Similarly, when one of Akbar's ministers, Bir Bal, imposed a tax on the Khatris
of Lahore, and they, led by the Guru, refused to pay it, Bir Bal threatened an armed attack, But it never
matured, for Bir Bal was killed in another expedition. The Guru now settled down to a life of comparative
peace and compiled the GURU-GRANTH to make the Sikhs, men of the BOOK. He had already given
them a central place of worship, the Golden Temple, organised Sangais (congregations) under the Masands
more effectively than before, and made it obligatory for Sikhs to part with the tithe in favour of the whole
community. This not only perfected the organisation of the faith in every way, but also gave Sikhs an idea

, of peoplehood,

Meanwhile, Jahangir, the Moghal emperor of Delhi, was hearing reports of the growing influence of
the Guru not only among the Hindus but also among the Muslims. Earlier, when a report was lodged with
Akbar that the Guru had compiled a Book in which the Muslim faith had been reviled, he had asked the
Book to be read out to him when he visited the Guru at Govindwal in 1598, and when this was done, he was
immensely pleased and satisfied that the Guru had a mission of synthesis rather than conflict and exclusive-
ness. But Jahangir was made of a different texture.

In these days, his son, Khusrau, rebelled against him and in his flight towards Kabul, he called on
the Guru, and, as is customary on such occasions the Guru blest him. But it was reported to Jahdngir that
the Guru had offered him monetary assistance and even applied a saffron-mark on his forehead to bless him
in his fight against the Emperor. So, Jahangir believing in the report and also wanting to get rid of a person
whose authority was growing, (as he himself admits in his autobiography, the Tuzak-i-Jahangiri, p. 35)
ordered that the Guru be arrested, his property confiscated to the State and he be made over to Murtaza
Khan, his Kotwal in Lahore, to be tortured to death.

The Emperor's orders were carried out and the Guru died a martyr at Lahore on May 30, 1606,

Guru Hargobind (1595-1644)

The martyrdom of Guru Arjun, it is commonly believed, turned the tide of Sikh history and made
them warlike instead of the pacifists that they were earlier. It is true, that when Guru Hargobind came to
the Throne, he was only eleven and yet he chose to wear two swords at the time of being anointed as the
Guru by Bhai Budha, the devout Sikh, who had seen the Sikh movement evolve ever since the days of Guru

- Nanak. Indeed, he trained the new Guru in the art of horsemanship, marksmanship, swordsmanship,
wrestling and hunting. The Guru was called Sachi Padshah (the True King), as was the custom ever since
Guru Nainak’s days, his audience-hall was known as Durbar as of old, and his accession to Guruship—the
coming to the Throne. His was the Sacha RaAj (True dominion or rule). A fily-brush waved over his head,
as in the case of the other Gurus. And he built a place for congregation for his Sikhs called the Akal Takht
or the Throne of the Immortal (opposite the Golden Temple in Amritsar), where besides spiritual matters,
secular affairs affecting the community were also discussed. He built up a small fortification also, called
Loh Garh (the fort of iron) and kept a small-sized cavalry and army. He also sent word to his Sikhs that
thereafter the offerings to be made to the Guru should be in the shape of weapons and horses. Hunting
expeditions were regularly held, as also symposia of martial music.

No wonder, in the eyes of the rulers, this was a departure from old pacifism. So it looked also in the
eyes of the detractors of Sikhism. And yet when we read that the terminology used in Guru Hargobind's
days was the same as in the days of Guru Nanak, that Nanak himself had protested against foreign rule,
ways of life, dress, language and diet, and even courted imprisonment at the hands of Babur, and that secular
activity had always been an integral part of the Sikh faith, we do not see any essential difference in the out-
jook of Guru Hargobind from his predecessors’ except perhaps in emphasis which was of course the need
of the time.
{ XLII j

But Jahingir sensed danger in it for his rule and without being provcked by the Guru in any way,
imprisoned him in the fort of Gwalior, According to some historians, he was in jail for twelve years, but it
is likely that he was released much earlier, Seeing the simple life of the Guru in the fort and his single-
minded devotion to God, Jahangir not only remitted his sentence considerably, but even tried to befriend
him, He would go out with him on hunting expeditions and paid a visit to him in Amritsar, even offering
to complete the construction of the Akal Takht at his own expense which the Guru declined to accept.

Guru Hargobind, like Guru Nanak before him, now travelled throughout the country and visited
Kashmir where he converted many people to his faith, A Gurdwara still stands to his memory here, and
most of the Sikhs now residing in Kashmir derive their faith from those days. He also journeyed in the
Uttar Pradesh and went to as far east as Pilibhit, building shrines to the memory of his predecessors and
crealing Sangats.

Meanwhile, Jahangir died and his son, Shah Jahan, coming to the throne, prohibited the conversion
of Muslims and ordered the demolition of many temples, including the Gurdwara Baoli Sahib at Lahore
which was razed to the ground and a mosque constructed in its place. But the Guru held his hand till Shah
Jahan struck the first blow against him in 1628, over a mere trifle, that the Sikhs had captured a hawk that
had strayed away from the King’s party which was hunting near Amritsar and refused to part with it, The
Guru's property was looted, but the loss of life, including the General's who led them, was all on the
Moghal side.

The Guru, not wanting to prolong this struggle, retired to Kartarpur (in Jullundur district). But
he did not want to be caught napping again and so kept his troops, which included Muslims, in good trim.
For the sake of his Muslim troops, he built a mosque at Hargobindpur nearby.

Another battle ensued with the Moghals when two of the most precious horses that a Sikh. had
brought as an offering for the Guru were snatched from him on the way by the Moghal forces. The Guru
deputed a robinhood type of a Sikh, Bidhi Chand, to rescue these horses which he did by a clever device.
This resulted in a major conflict and the Guru was attacked by a strong contingent of the Moghal forces.
More than a thousand Sikhs were killed in this battle as against many more on the other side, including the
commanders.

One Paindt Khan, who was a General in the Sikh camp, deserted to the Moghals on his dismissal
from service and came with a Moghal detachment to attack the Guru at Kartarpur in 1634, But Painde
Khan along with another Moghal General, Kal Khan, was killed and the Moghal forces scattered leaving
behind a considerable number of the dead,

The last ten years of his life the Guru passed in meditation, preaching the Gospel and living a very
austere life so much so that he even gave up the use of the pillow. He insisted so much on simple virtues
of life that he severely reprimanded his sons, Atal Rai and Baba Gurditta, for performing miracles. Both
these sons died before him, as well as another son, Ani Rai, and though he had two more, Suraj Mal and
Tegh Bahadur, he appointed his grandson, Hari Rai, to be his successor for his obvious saintliness and
strength of character, for he found Surajmal to be much too involved in the world and Tegh Bahadur
practically a recluse,

Guru Hari Rai ( 1630-1661 )

Though Guru Hari Rai kept a cavalry of 2200 Sikhs ready to defend the faith, and was himself a
great hunter, his heart was so tender that he would capture, but never kill, a bird. Once, lost in his
thoughts, he was passing through a garden and a flower fell from the stem struck by the flaps of his loose
coat. He was so much filled with remorse that he pledged that thereafter he would always keep the loose
folds assembled in his arm, and to this he stuck throughout his life.

And yet when Dara Shikoh, a Sufi brother of Aurangzeb, losing the battle of succession, was flecing
towards the west, and came to Goindwal to ask for the Guru's help, he arrayed his men along the river Beds
and held the pursuing forces till Dara had fled to security. Aurangzeb did not forgive this, and as soon as
he came to the throne, he asked the Guru to present himself in his court. The Guru did not go himself but
sent his son, Ram:Rai, to see.the Emperor. Aurangzeb received him well and said he only wanted to be
assured that there was nothing derogatory to the Muslims in the Sikh Scripture, nor were the Sikhs poised
against the imperial rule. Ram Rai with his vast spiritual background and cultured manners pleased the

GuruGranth Sahib 999999292999992999990200999999

4

APIA GOES PC OCHBGOSSSEGCOSBESCOPBEOCECECCECESCOCOSSEOCCOSCOBE

SS

LL
{ XLIV }

Emperor much, but once misinterpreted the Word of Guru Nanak, carried off by his desire to give not the
slightest offence to his host. The Sikhs of Delhi reported the matter to the Guru and the latter was so
anguished that he called upon Ram Rai to leave the Emperor's court at once and go to wherever he wanted
but never to see him again.

During his whole period, the Guru pursued missionary activities with great zeal and never for once
either sought, or was given, an opportunity to clash with the Moghal rule, He died in 166] handing over
his charge to his tender son, Hari Krishan.

Guru Hari Krishan (1656-1664)

When Hari Krishan, the eighth Guru, came to the Throne, he was barely five years old. Ram Rai,
his elder brother, saw in this a great opportunity to press his claim for Guruship before the Emperor, now
his friend. He even installed himself as Guru at Dera Dun, and appointed a few missionaries to propagate
his cause. The Emperor too was interested to pasa on, if he could, the Throne of Nanak to a loyal, spineless
friend of his, like Ram Rai. So he called both parties to his presence in Delhi. The Emperor put the
young Guru's intelligence to test om several occasions, and he found him perfect and rejected the case of
Ram Rai, more so because the Sikhs had felt greatly irritated at the Emperor's meddling in their religious
affairs so blatantly.

Unfortunately for the Sikhs, however, the Guru got small-pox here and died at the age of eight,
suggesting, as his end approached, that after him the Guru would be found at Bakala (referring thereby to
his grand uncle, Tegh Bahadur, who was leading a very pious and detached life there).

Gora Tegh Bahadur (1621-1675)

Hearing that the last Guru had referred to the new Guru being found at Bakal4, many claimants to
the Throne set up their gaddis there and created much confusion in the minds of the Sikhs as to who in fact
the Guru was, But devout Sikhs found out Tegh Bahadur and installed him as the Guru, at the age of 44.

One of his rivals, Dhirmal, grandson of Guru Hari Ri, even tried to take his life anda shot was fired
at him, and his house was ransacked. Tegh Bahadur escaped with minor injuries, but did not get provoked.
However, the Sikhs attacked Dhirmal’s house, and took possession of all his property, including the original
copy of the Adi Granth which the Sikhs revered much and which Dhirmal had looted away, The Guru,
however, not only returned the property to Dhirmal but, it is said, deposited the copy of the Adi Granth in
a safe bed of the river Beds while he was on his way to Kiratpur and sent word to Dhirmal, against the
wishes of his Sikhs, to recover it from there. This copy, now lying at Kartarpur with the descendants of
Dhirmal, still shows signs at the borders of having been soiled by water.

With this, however, his troubles did not end, for elsewhere too he was fucing hostility. He went to
Amritsar to pay his homage at the Golden Temple, but the custodians shut its doors upon him. He left
Bakala to live at Kiratpur, but here too Dhirmal’s followers caused much annoyance to him. The Guru
thereupon purchased a piece of land in the Shivalik hills, and founded upon it the city of Anandpur (now in
the district of Hoshiarpur). Here too, he found no peace, and moved out in the Malwa region, and from
there to Hariana, preaching his Gospel and digging up wells and tanks on way for use of the peasarits of
that arid land. His travels caused such a consternation in Aurangzeb’s mind that he got him arrested, But

‘due to the meditation of Raja Ram Singh, a Rajput General of Aurangzeb, the matter was amicably settled.

Thereafter, the Guru went towards the east, visiting on way the historic cities of Agra, Allahabad,
Banaras, Gaya and Patna, Leaving his family at Patna, he went to Dacca. Thus, the whole castern region
right upto Assam was studded with Sikh shrines due to the missionary zeal of the Sikhs. While he was in |
Assam, his friend, Raja Ram Singh, came with an expeditionary force against Assam and came to the Guru
to seek his blessings. Many expeditions had been sent by Aurangzeb before too, but the Assamese were
unbeaten. This time much more bloodshed would have ensued to ensure victory of the imperial forces but
for the intervention of the Guru who negotiated a settlement between the two parties. A Sikh temple stands
at this place, called Dhubri, in memory of this event.

Meanwhile, a son had been born to the Guru at Patna, but the Guru, getting urgent summons from
his followers in the Panjab, hastened back to his native land, taking good care that his son was brought up
at Patna according to the traditions of his House. In the Panjab and Kashmir he found the Hindus and

Mon 4 :
PEDPOIDBIIQI Guru-Granth Subib
Sikhs greatly terrorised on account of the bigoted policies of Aurangzeb, and put heart into them to face
the situation with calmness and courage. He invited his family also to join him at Anandpur, but he soon
left them again for a tour of the country right upto Agra. On the way, he was received with great ovation;
people became his followers in large numbers and made offerings to him. The Emperor was receiving
alarming reports that the Guru was gathering great strength and instilling a spirit of resistance against forcible
conversions and exactions, When the Pundits of Kashmir had visited him at Anandpur earlier, seeking his
help to save their faith, for they were being harassed into changing their religion, the Guru's reply to them
was, “Don't be afraid, nor make others so. J shall much rather lay down my head than that any harm
comes to you. You may tell Aurangzeb’s governor that if he can convert me, you will also follow suit,”
Undoubtedly, he would have preached similarly to others as well, on his tour later.

Aurangzeb decided to take no chances and once again issued orders for his arrest. He was taken’
prisoner near Sirhind and kept prisoner there for about four months, before being shifted to Delhi in chains.
He was asked either to accept Islam or death and he chose death. He refused to show a miracle to save
his life. And in November, 1675, he too was beheaded in the Chandni Chowk of Delhi where stands a os
great monument, Sis Ganj, to his memory. His body lay writhing there with orders that no one would
take it. However, a Sikh carter got hold of his body in the dark of night and cremated it with great respect
burning his house along with it, to escape notice. His head was carried off by another low-caste Sikh who
took it to Anandpur where his son, Gobind, was. The head was cremated there with full honours, his son
swearing at this time that he would now create a body of the Sikhs who would not be able to hide their
identity as they had done at the time of Guru Tegh Bahadur's death, when no one had come forward in
Delhi to claim his dead body, for fear of being identified and so persecuted by the Emperor.

Guru Gobind Singh (1666-1708)

Guru Gobind was only nine years of age when he was called upon to undertake the onerous respon-
sibilities of Guruship in those times of tribulation and stress. Having passed his childhood at Patn4, he
had picked up eastern Hindi and Sanskrit, and now he not only improved his knowledge in these languages
but also learnt Persian and Gurmukhi characters. For some time, he retired to the Nahan State in the
Himalayas in a place called Paonta and read much of the literature that had been composed before in
Sanskrit and Braj. He learnt to write poetry. He now not only translated the whole gamut of heroic stories
as found in the Ramayana, the Mahabharata and the Puranas, to instil the virtues of heroism and chivalry
in his people, but also employed 52 poets to undertake a similar task. In this literature, much of which has
been lost and only some of which is preserved in his Book, the Dasam Granth, compiled after his death, the
same old strain of the oneness of God and the whole humanity runs as in the works of his predecessors. All
superstitions and taboos are decried in a humorous vein, and a spirit of go-getting and sacrifice for right-
eousness inculcated.

His spirit of optimism can be gauged from the reply he is said to have given his father when asked
what the man should do when he became utterly helpless. Both the verses are the compositions of Guru
Tegh Bahadur, in the form of, it appears, question and answer. Guru Tegh Bahadur'’s inquiry was :

“My strength is gone and I am in bondage,
and from it now there is no escape.

God alone is my support, and He alone will help
as he helps His Saints.

To this Gobind Singh's reported reply was :

“T have rallied my strength, my bonds are loosed,
there is every hope for me.

Says Nanak : everything is in the hands of the Lord,
Now help me, my God,”

This, then, is the shift in emphasis that Guru Gobind Singh brought abeut in ‘the Sikh movemeat.
He has often been accused of his anti-Muslim bias, but there is not a trace of ivin his works... Says he :

os

BEBE HCCCECHOSGSE SCSCOCEOHSHSCOOSECOESECE SE PECESEHSESESEEEE!

“The same are the temple and the mosque, wal g af
The same are the Pooja and the Nimdz, ;
All men are the same all over, oa,
Though each a different appearance has.”
Guru-Branth Salk 9999999999999999999999009999999999929022999090090%

Page 46 
[ XLVI ]

And, as we shall see, the Guru in his unsought military campaigns fought with equal zeal with the
Hindu hill chiefs who surrounded him, and the Moghal imperial forces, both Hindus and Muslims constitu-
ting his army and following, even in the worst days of crisis and struggle.

Like his grand-father, Guru Hargobind, he too was forced by circumstances to prepare himself for
war, but he never for once acquired an inch of territory for himself. The first battle he fought was with Raja
Fateh Chand of Sri Nagar (now in Himachal Pradesh), who, jealous of his growing influence, attacked him
unprovoked in 1686. The battle was fought at Bhangani, near Paonta in the Nahan State, in which the Guru
trounced his adversary, helped by a force of 700 Muslims who fought alongside of him under the leadership,
it is said, of Pir Budhu Shah, a great admirer of his. The Pir lost two of his sons in the battle.

The Guru had married twice meanwhile, and had one son Ajit Singh from his wife Sundari, and
three sons, Jujhar Singh, Zorawar Singh and Fateh Singh from his other wife, Jito, who died in 1701. The
Guru's third wife, Sahib Kaur, was married to him in the same year, but he contracted this marriage on the
assurance that she would remain a virgin all her life. She is, therefore, called the Mother of the Khalsa.

In these days, the Imperial Government of Delhi levied a tribute on the hill chiefs and when a
demand was made on them, many of them, led by the Raja of Kahlur, refused to pay it and. requested the
Guru to assist them. Though the Guru had been earlier engaged in a battle with them he readily agreed
and joined hands with them to resist the attack launched by the Governor of Jammu under orders from
Delhi. In this battle again, the forces of the hill chiefs, led by the Guru, were victorious.

Alarmed at this, Aurangzeb sent his son, Muazzim (later called Bahadur Shah) to put the affairs of
the Panjab in order. The Prince sent a force from Lahore to punish the hill chiefs and also the Guru, But
while no harm came to Guru Gobind Singh, the hill chiefs suffered an ignominious defeat, for they got
divided on the basis of caste. The Guru later tried to bring them together, but found the task impossible as
superstitions, caste and mutual jealousies, which have been the bane of this country for centuries, stood in
the way.

The Guru, therefore, decided to create a community which would not only be iconoclastic and fight
against all shams and taboos of caste, dress, dict and status, but being worshippers of the One Supreme
Being would look upon all humanity as one. Nay, they would be the spearhead of a world-wide move-
ment for synthesis and dedicated service. Sucha force was to wear a distinctive appearance as it often
happens in almost every age and clime in respect of dedicated men and women, And such 4 force the Guru
steated in 1699 on the day of Baisakhi at Anandpur.

Thousands of people from far and near had gathered on this auspicious day to pay homage to the
Guru. The Guru, a naked sword in hand, came to the congregation and asked for the head of a Sikh for
the cause of Dharma. There was great consternation in the Assembly, but one by one five of them came for-
ward to present their heads to the Guru, four of them belonging to the lower castes, Them the Guru called
his five beloveds (Panj Pyare) and administered to them sugared water stirred with a steel dagger over which
they had read the Word of the Guru. This was called Amrit or (nectar) and when the Gurn had adminis-
tered it to them himself, he stood, with joined palms, before them, and said, “Now it is my turn to be
baptised by you". And so they baptised him, their Guru, thus emphasising the democratic spirit of the
faith. Truly has it been said of the Guru :

“Blessed is Gobind Singh who is the Guru
and the disciple rolled into one.” .

About 80,000 Sikhs were baptised in a similar way in a few days’ time. Them the Guru asked to
shed all superstitions of caste and birth, of idol-worship and belief in anything but the One God, They were
told to keep ever-ready to defend the faith, not only theirs, but even of others as Guru Tegh Bahadur had
done before, for humanity, preached the Guru, ‘was one. They were to act as a unifying force in the world
and live to work, work to share, and share to Believe. ‘“‘My Sikhs shall obliterate the differences, between
Hindus and Muslims, touchables and untouchables, high and low, man and woman and create one fraternity
of man believing in the fatherhood of God.”

The Sikhs were also asked to wear five K's, namely Keshas (unshorn hair); Kangha, the comb, to
keep them clean ; Kara, the steel bangle, symbol of the omnipresence of God, Kachha or drawers, symbol of
chastity ; and Airpan or the sword as symbol of sovereign authority and resistance to evil.

93III23933233990 Gure-Gronth Sahi

[ XLVII J

The Hindu hill chiefs were scared at this, and sought the help of Aurangzeb to fight the rising
power of the Guru, The Moghal emperor sent orders to the Nawabs of Sirhind and Lahore to assist them
which they did and the whole force marched upon Anandpur in 1701. For three long years, they laid
siége to the fort but the Guru did not capitulate, even though many of his followers died of hunger and
thirst and many Were slain on the field of battle. Forty Sikhs even disclaimed him and left for their homes
in the thick of the night. But shamed by their womenfolk, they returned and died fighting later at Mukatsar,
These are called the ‘Saved Ones” (Muksas).

But the endurance of man has its limits. The Guru wanted to stick out here, but his followers persu-
aded him to leave the fort for some other place of safety. But as soon as they came out, they were pounced
upon by the enemy. The Guru's family was separated from him, only two elder sons remaining with him.
He now moved towards Chamkaur (in the present district of Ambala), his mother, Gujri, with her two
younger grandsons taking shelter with a Brahmin servant of theirs, named Gangu. Gangu, however, betrayed
them to the Naw4b of Sirhind who got the two tender sons of Gobind bricked up alive. Mother Gujri died
of shock, In the battle of Chamkaur which followed, the Guru lost his other two sons as well, and hard-
pressed by the five Sikhs left with him in the improvised fortress, he escaped in disguise. Here, he was
helped by two Pathans, Nabi Khan and Ghani Khan, who declaring him to be a Muslim Pir escorted him
to safety through the Moghal forces that were combing the countryside in search of the Guru. Crossing
the forests of Machhiwara, he canie to Jatpura, where another Muslim, Rai Kalha, offered him help. But as
the imperial forces were pursuing him, the Guru left this place for Mukatsar in the Ferozepur district and
collecting a small force pounced upon his adversaries. The Moghal forces were defeated, and the Guru now
turned towards Talwandi Sabo, where he stayed for some time. It is now called Damdama Sahib, or the
resting place, as well as the Guru's Kashi. For, it is here that he re-edited the Adi Granth and fixed its
form finally in which we find it today, expunging apocryphal writings, amending a few spellings, adding the
four hymns in the beginning for evening prayers, but not adding any of his own compositions (except per-
haps one couplet ascribed to him) and leaving the Granth as it was before in the days of Guru Arjun.

From a place called Dina, he sent a letter, written in Persian verse, calld Zafar Nameh (the letter
of Victory) to Aurangzeb, saying that though he called himself a religious man, he acted most irreligiously,
He also reminded him that although his sons and many of his followers were killed, he himself was yet alive.
Justifying his use of the sword, he said :

“When the affairs were past any other remedy,
I thought it righteous to unsheath the sword.”

Aurangzeb wrote back to him that he should come and sce him, But before the Guru could do so, he
heard that Aurangzeb had died. The Guru thereupon left immediately for Delhi and on Bahadur Shah
seeking his help in the war of succession, the Guru helped him with a detachment. On being victorious,
Bahadur Shah invited him to his court at Agra and offered him a robe of honour, a jewelled scarf and a cash
offering of Rs. 60,000. Negotiations proceeded about settling the differences between the house of Nanak
and the house of Babur. But nothing came of them and the Guru thereupon left for the south and settled
at Nanded in the Deccan. ,

Here, he converted a Bairagi, Madho Das, who, born in Rajauri in the Poonchh district of Kashmir,
had renounced the world and come to settle here on the banks of the Godavari, leading the life of a recluse,
He was renamed Banda Singh, for he now called himself Banda (or the slave of the Guru).

[t is here that the Guru met his end at the hands of two Pathans sent, it appears, by the Nawab of
Sirhind who, scared of the Guru's growing influence with the new Emperor, wanted to do him to death, The
wound, inflicted by the Pathans (who were also put to death there and then) was sewn up, according to some
writers, but it burst open Jater when the Guru was trying a bow. On October 7, 1708, he breathed his last.

When the Sikhs asked him who their Guru would be in future, he said, “The Word is the spiritual
Guru as contained in the Adi Granth : the secular Guru is the Panth or the whole Khals-in-faith,” Thus
“was democracy forever established in the spiritual as well as the social domains by the tenth Master.

é

5

Sea Sha act hg Tr a hag il hg ag Ra ha ag

AS

oS

SSQEESECCCSISSSES: MSOPCSSOGSOOSSESEGECRECEE EE SEESBOCBOHEECD

:
'
|
[ XLVI ]

After Guru Gobind Singh

For about seven years after the death of Guru Gobind Singh, Banda Singh Bahddur (he was $0 called
on account of his unparalleled bravery) won resounding victories against the imperial Moghal forces and
established his own rule in large tracts of land west of Delhi, ransacking Sirhind and killing the Nawab, He
also struck his own coin, but was captured at Gurdas Nangal near Gurdaspur and was put to death at Delhi
along with seven hundred others. For fifty years thereafter, it was a battle of life and death for the Sikhs.
Price was put on their heads and they were hounded out of town and country to seek refuge in the woods,
But this also gave Sikhs an excellent opportunity for training in guerilla warfare by which they harassed the
invading armies of Nadir Shah and Ahmad Shah Abdali. They were now now divided into twelve Misals (or
clans), but whenever they attacked a target, they did so jointly after passing a,unanimous resolution (Gurmaria),
And even before Ranjit Singh, lion of the Panjab, came to power and created an empire which included a
greater portion of the present Panjabs, Jammu and Kashmir, the North-West Frontier Province, etc., the
twelve Misals of the Sikhs had each created for itself an independent dominion, The erstwhile Sikh States
of Patiala, Nabha, Jind, Faridkot, Kalsia and Kapurthala were established in these days.

After Ranjit Singh's death in 1839, confusion prevailed in the Sikh regime due to the intrigues of
leadership for power. Meanwhile, the British, who were waiting for an opportunity to annex the Panjab,

doorway to Afghanistan and Russia struck and, following two wars, the Sikh kingdom was integtated with
British India.

During the early British days, several movements of reform ensued, including the Namdhari move-
ment, which not only propagated the Gospel of the Name, but also led an anti-British crusade. No Namdhari
was to study the ferangi’s language, nor seek employment with him, nor use his post offices, nor any of the
British products, The leader of the Namdh4ri movement, Baba Ram Singh, was imprisoned and died during
his incarceration in Rangoon, Namdhiaris, however, made a few departures in the original Path of the Guru
and became strict vegetarians, discarded the sword in preference to the rosary and did not accept the GURU-
GRANTH as Guru, as they continued to believe in a living Guru.

The Nirankaris (or believers in the One Formless Lord) of Rawalpindi led another reform movement
in the first-half of the nineteenth century, purging the community of all extraneous influences and insisting on
the worship of the One Absolute Lord. The Nirmalas, or the pure ones, continued to be the interpreters
of the GRANTH in the old Vedantist tradition, being well-versed in Sanskrit and the Hindu literature,

But the greatest upsurge for reform came with the Akali movement which, beginning with the Singh
Sabha movement in the late nineteenth century and insisting on holding on to the orthodox faith of Guru
Gobind, culminated in the movement for expulsion of corrupt hereditary priests from the Sikh temples and
handing over their management to an elected body of the whole community, called the Shiromani Gurdwara
Parbandhak Committee (S.G.P.C, for short), This movement involved them in a tussel with the British
Government as well, because Authority stood by the vested interests of the priests. The Sikhs, thereafter,
participated actively in the movement for the country’s liberation, though the British continued to- recruit
them in the imperial army in large numbers and grant the awards of land in the Canal-irrigated areas of the
Panjab, During this period, many Sikhs travelled and settled abroad in U. K., Canada, Malaysia, E, Africa
and California as farmers, lumbermen, factory and office werkers, artisans, contractors, doctors, engineers
teachers and lawyers. At home also they made tremendous progress in all spheres of activity, notably in
engineering, small-scale industry, transport, and various other businesses. Their cream, however, still stays
in the army or on the farmland, Punjab is now both the granary and the sword-arm of India.

After the Partition of the country, all that the Sikhs had created was ruined, but it gave them. also

the first opportunity to congregate in a compact piece of land which is now the Indian Panjab, where they
constitute the majority people.

Though the Sikhs are barely fifteen million, mainly concentrated in the Panjab, the Sikh faith is owned
by many more people, notably the Sindhis who are Sikhs in belief and practice, except in form. A large number
of the Hindus also believe in the tenets of the Sikh faith and look upon the Sikh Gurus as their very own.
By the Grace of the Gue Supreme Being,’ Che Eterial,”’ the All-pernading®
urusha,* The Gresiar, ithent fear, ithout FAnte, the Gein
8
Bepoud Time, Noat-incarnaied,* Self-existent, The Enlightener.*

Moeditativus

True in the Beginning, True in the Primeval age,
Truc He is and True He shall be. [J]

Thinking avails not, howso hard one thinks ;

Nor silence avails, howsoever one shrinks

Into oneself*, Nor Hunger goes

With the (Pleasure-) loads of the worlds.

Of a myriad clevernesses, not one works,

How then to be True 7? How rend the Veil of sham, untruth ?
His Will® (forsooth)

Inborn in us, ingrained?,

Thou follow.

(thas | is Truth attained). {J}

I. I. “Onkdr’ is the the ‘original \ word in the text. ~ According to Swami Vivekonanda, “Onker is the most holy word
of the Vedas". A symbolic word meaning the Supreme Being, the Ocean of Knowledge and Bliss Absolute™’. (dja Yoga).
A fuller definition of this word is given in Mandukopanishad :

aiindieeiine "ad carrer yt waguiectels adage ot |

aSrakateas Tree ce oo REP lit
“That which was, is, will be, i al] Qnkar, And that which triple lime transcends 15 Onkar too." (Perse 1)

‘Onkar" has also been used by the Sikh divine, Bhai Gurdas, in the meaning of Creator-Lord, which is that aspect
of Godhead when He evolves out of His Absolute Self (Nirankar or the Formless aspect) to become a Creative Reing :
Grigg nats ag, use, uret Siz od (Stergit wert VT, TaMT, aril, deiae wrt) (Ward). The figure ‘one" appended to “Onker’
does not merely signify God's unity as against trinity, but also affirms His being a personality and not merely a Shunya
(g=7) or void. “Transcendent (@°, ai)-lmmanent aca, #Tz)", suggests Kapur Singh,

2. Sat (qaq), literally meaning Truth. Truth, im the Sikh credo, is that verity which is eternal.

3. The word in the text is Nam. Literally rendered, it would mean “The Name’, or spirit as opposed to Roop
(Form). A full definition of the word can be found only in the Sikh Scripture itself, for its concept differs fram the Weelic.
It cannot be rendered merely as ‘logos’ (or the Word, the second person of Christian Trinity). Guru-Nanak himself
explains this term in the J4PU ; ‘Jeta Aeera Tetra Naon’’. i,¢, “As much as He hath created that much is His Name".
The term has also been used to denote God, Word and the discriminating Spirit (within). Etymologically, the word has a
striking resemblance with the Greek “mewerena’ or the Bright Essence as opposed to phenomena. C/. Sans. arta |

4. ‘Purkhe’ (lit, male person). In the Sankhya system of Hindu philosophy, Parwsha (the Universal Spirit),
eternal, indestructible, all-pervasive, is without activity or attribute, and it is left to Prakeiti (primal nature), itself an
uncaused cause, and an ultimate principle, to bring the phenomenal world into being. But the Sikh doctrine, while
making ust of the word, emphasises Purusta being Himself the only Creator. Asin the Sufi and Vaishnavic lore, He is
the only He, His creatures being females longing to go out and Unite with Him.

5. Sikhism rejects out of hand the theory of incarnation of God. The Guru-Saint thus is mot God-incarnate,
even though he has all the attributes of a living, human God and so identified with Him, as is his Word the (disembodied)
embodiment of the Guru through which he reveals his God-nature.

6. By many Sikh, and following them European, translators the word "Gur’ has been joined on to ‘Prasdd”
to mean, “By favour (or Grace) of the Guru lis He dwelt upon), etc.” But here Guru Nanak is giving, in monosyllables,
the attribyies of God. The Guru here, therefore, is Guru-in-God whose Grace is invoked. As such, Guru" can only be
rendered as ‘Enlightner’ which is also its lineral meaning in Sanskrit.

Dr. Mohan Singh has rendered the whole as follows :—

“By the Grace of the Onc, Logos-Creator, Truth-cxistence, Namer, Creator-integrator, Sans fear, sans enmity,
above lime, Form-manifester, above birth, self-sufficient, self-dependent Being."

7. As the Yogi thinks, by going into a trance. For silence, according to Sikh thought, is mot to be of the
mouth, but of the individual mind and will go that the Universal Mind and Will are given full play.

8 Both words in the text—'Hukem' and “Rezd'—are Arabic and occur in the Quran and mean respectively
God's Cosmic Order and His Will.

9. The original ‘Likhyd Nal’ does not mean “‘as is set forth herewith’, As we read in Gocu Arjun; “Dwell
thou on Govind who is ingrained in thy body and mind." (Rag Gauri) |

Guru-Grantl, Sahib
Page 5

wen

oH

4s

[2]

His Will it is that Creates the forms, though Will one cannot tell.
Through Will the stream of life doth flow :

Through Will is greatness won ; some high, some low,
In joy, in pain,

As His Will doth Ordain,

Some blest are by the Will of the Giver ;

Some lost in girdling the Cycle ever. ~

All, yea, all are subject to the Will;

None, O none, beyond its pale.

And he, who knows the Will, doth feel

The ‘I in him no more, no more, /2)

The mighty sing of Thy Might,

And the Blessed of Thy Light ;

His Goodness, Greatness, Heauty :

Of Knowledge hard to classify.

Some sing Thou Makest, Givest the sack,
Thou Takest life and Givest it back.
Some sing that Thou art distant, far.
Some sing Thou See-est, Watchest all.
©, countless sing of countless things,
Thou Fillest all to overflowing.

Thou Givest more than hold can we,
Through ages, men have lived on Thee.
Thy Will on us Thou Dost Employ,

And Thou, the Care-free, Livest in Joy. /3/

True the Master, True His Name,

Infinite Love His astrolabe.

The seekers they all beg at His Door.

And the Giver He Gives but more and more.

What offer to make to See His Court ?

What words to utter to win His Support ?

Meditate thou, in. the ambrosial morn, on the True Name,
His Greatness, Glory. For though a better frame

Of life is attained by Good Actions’,

Salvation comes through Grace, Benediction.

Know thou this, Nanak, that He, the True One, is all in all :
(On Him, on Him, O let us call). [4]

Neither Appointed, mor Created?,

Self-existent, Unconditioned.

He, who Serveth Him, is honoured.

Nanak : sing of Him, all-gifted.

Sing of Him, and of Him hear,

Love him, (He the Master dear),

Thou shalt shed Pain

And Joy will rain.

His Word is the (Yogi's) Wordless Harmony’,
His Word is the Word of the Vedas’ symphony.
In the Word doth He have His Being (The Law),
He's Shiva, He’s Vishnu, He’s Brahma‘,
—(None other)—

And He's Parvati! and Lakshmi’, the Mother.

5 OSESESSEECSSOSOSESCOSE

1,
deeds done, promising men much profit in new births for works of faith.

2.
3.
4.
§,

‘Karma’ of the original text is the principle of causality in moral experience. Cf. “As fruit of good
x (Bhagvad Gita)

The reference is to God being shaped into, and installed as, an idol.

“Nadu', according to Swami Vivekananda, is the sound finer than is heard by our ears.
The Hindu Trinity.

The consort of Shiva.

6 The Hindu goddess of wealth. Also Muyo in subtle junction with whom Brahma is supposed t
brought the creation into being- = coal : © have
His Knowledge is Unutterable even if 1 knew
I couldn't tell, The Guru did shew :

“ "Tis He who Giveth to each and all".

(On Him, On Him, O let us call). £3)

Bathing at the holies ? No use,

If the Lord His Pleasure were to refuse,

The Creation I see around,

Nothing without Destiny hath found.

The Gems, the Jewels, the Rubies are in the mind,
If one were to find

And hearken to the Guru's call :

“ "Tis He who Giveth to each and all”.

(On Him, On Him, O let us call). /6/

If one were to live for Ages four,

Or ten times. more,

Known in the nine divisions of the world,
Followed, honoured, famed, all,

If he were from His Grace to fall,

A worm among worms, a sinner among sinners'.
Nanak : He Bestoweth Virtue on the non-virtuous,
Giveth Piety to the Pious.

But none can do him good in turn,

Onone! [7]

They, who hearken (to the Word of the Lord),

Know what Siddhas*, Peers’, high Narhas* art.

What (substance) the Sky, what (nature) the Earth, the Bull,
The Islands, the Spheres, the Underworlds :

Deathless become they who hearken to the Word,

Nanak : a Devotee is forever joyed,

And his Pain and Sin are destroyed. /&/

They, who hearken (to the Word of the Lord),

Know what Brahma, Shiva and Indra® are ;

And utter : ‘Praise be to Him’, the Mantra’,

And know the secret of life, of Yoga,

Of Shastras, Smritis and the Vedas. P.3
Nanak : a Devotee is forever joyed,

And his Pain and Sin are destroyed. [9/7

They, who hearken (to the Word of the Lord),
Gather Truth, Contentment, Knowledge and Reward
Of bathing ai holies sixty eight. (And lo ')

They that hymn it, in Honour grow,

Their mind attaineth an even flow®,

Nanak : a Devotee is forever joyed,

And his Pain and Sin are destroyed. {107

They, who hearken (to the Word of the Lord),

Fathom the Deeps of Virtues all : .
(Are glorious like) a king, a Sheikh*, a Peer (divine).
Even the Blind will see the Path (Sublime).

Mani Singh, the Sikh divine, translates ; “Even the sinners will blame him".

The Yogic ascetics who have attained extra-psychic powers.

The Muslim divines.

The Yogic teachers,

Who is supposed, in Hindu mythology. to support the earth,

The god of gods, according to Rigveda.

“Mand” of the text is derived from *“Manr’ (Sans, Haq) and is thus inflected to suit the exigencies of rhyme.
If we interpret ‘Mand" in its literal sense, the verse would mean : “On hearing, even the cvil-doers begin to praise their

Lord”.

Sa eben

a. ‘Sahj Dhyan’ of the text is a Yogic term, meaning meditation in a state of equipoise.
9. The Muslim chief.

Page 5
And the Fathomless Deep

Cometh into their grasp.

Nanak : a Devotee is forever joyed,

And his Pain and Sin are destroyed. {JJ

Those who Believe! are in a State Sublime,
Their virtues one cannot chime,
No paper, no pen, no scribe,
Can their State describe.
, Such is the Word? Immaculate :
Were one to Helieve with all one’s heart! [12]

Those who Believe,

Their minds awaken to Higher Consciousness,
To inner knowledge of all spheres.

For them no Blows, (no Sorrow’s breath),
For them no longer the ways of Death.

Such is the Word Immaculate :

Were one to Believe with all one’s heart! [J3/

How clear the Path of one who Believes,

‘He lives with Honour, with Honour leaves.
Walks straight on the Highways’,

Not wanders in the byways,

(Nor takes the Round),

And is to Dharma, the Duty, bound.

Such is the Word Immaculate :

Were one to Believe with all one’s heart! /J4]

Unto the Believer opens the Door of Salvation,

And he becomes the source of his kin's Benediction.
He himself Swims across and thase that seck His Door,
He wanders in search of Alms no more.

Such is the Word Immaculate :

Were one to Believe with all one’s heart! {5}

They (who hear the Word, Believe) are the creation’s cream*,
They are the ones Approved, Supreme :

Are honoured in the Court (of God) such beings,
Look beauteous in the councils of kings.

They fix their minds on the One Master only.
They say and do what is thoughtful, holy.

And know that God's doings

Are beyond the count of us beings.

That the Bull is Dharma, the Law, born of Mercy,
Which, through Contentment, creates Harmony®.
Else, one who knows must justify,

How great the load the Bull must carry.

‘There are worlds upon worlds, beneath, beyond.
Who is it that supports them? (‘Tis God),

1, “Munona’, according to the Vedic thinkers, is logical reflection and immediately follows and precedes
“Shravan” (hearing) and ‘Nidhidyhésan’ (disciplined meditation), I have, however, followed the Opanishadic connotation
of the word, which is more in line with the Guru's thought. “Since He by neither word, nor mind, nor sight can ever
be gained, how is He realised by anyone but by him who says “He is, (Karhopanishad, 11, 3, 12).

Sear ray are” rh aT TeCaT
Teta waite Fey TETTART o Hs BVT

See also stanza 21 of the ‘Japu* in which the Guru names the three stages as hearing, believing and loving.

2. Lit, Name.

3. For ‘Mag", ‘Panth’ and ‘Dharma’ sce Dhammapad’.

4, ‘Panch' of the original text can only mean “the elect". The word recurs, and bears the same meaning, in
stanza 44,

5. That isto say, it is when men are content and compassionate that the world stands on an even keel. The Goro

rejects here for thar reason the Puranic belief that the earth is suppomed by the mythical Bull.
Whose Eternal Finger hath Writ the features,
And colour, kind, and form of all creatures.

© would one dare to write the account ? and
How staggering the count ?

How great His Power, how striking His Beauty,

And of His Gifts, O who could tell with stutcty 7

One Word, and the whole Universe throbbed into being’,

And myriads of rivers (of life) came gushing.

Powerless am [, O Lord, to describe what Thy Excellences be,

Sacrifice am I a myriad times unto Thee,

That what Pleaseth Thee is the only good done,

O Thou. the Eternal, the Formless One. //6/

Countless the ways of Recitation,

Countless the ways of Devotion.

Countless the ways of Worship,

Countless the Austerities, their hardships.
Countless the Books, countless the reciters of Vedas ;
Countless the Yogis, in mind detached, Udas,
Countless Thy Votaries, Thy knowledge pursue,
Thy Virtues view.

Countless the men of Piety.

Countless the men of Mercy.

Countless the Devotees on Thee ruminate,

In silence Meditate.

Countless the heroes who face the steel.

How powerless ! feel,

© Lord, to tell what Thy Excellences be.
Sacrifice am I myriad times unto Thee.

That what Pleaseth Thee is the only good done,
0 Thow, the Eterna!, the Formless One, {i7]

Countless the unwise, in black ignorance reel,
Countless the usurpers and those that steal,
Countless the rulers who force thetr way,
Countless the cut-throats whom violence doth sway.
Countless the sinners whom sin engages,
Countless the liars who wander in mazes,
Countless the wretches, have filth as fll,
Countless the slanderers carrying load of Evil,
Thus thinketh Nanak, the lowlest of the lowly?,
Sacrifice am I unto Thee a myriad times, O Holy,
That what Pleaseth Thee is the only good done,
© Thou, the Eternal, the Formless One. [/8)

Countless Thy Names, Countless Thy Places, Lord,
Couniless the Spheres, beyond all thought

© count there cannot be,

With words we name Thee, Hymn Thee.

With words all knowledge, all praise, all song,
With words ali speech, al! writing’s vogue.

With words we tell of our Union with Thee,

But Thou aren't subject to the words Thou wrote,
‘Tis we

Who receive what Thy Will be.

Thy Name extends to all Thou Createst,

No place but where Thou not pervadest.

Whai power have I to tell what Thy Excellences be,
Sacrifice am T a myriad times unto Thee.

Bhai Mani Singh interprets the phrase ‘Pho Kavao, as, One Onkar'. See also the Bible (Si. John, 1) “In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, aud the Word was God". The meaning, therefore, is that the
creation came into being through God's Will (Word).

2% Guru Nanak while recounting the lowly and the lost includes himself amongst them.

Ooo eec StGCeteaccee Ou Ty ay ky ah Th Ch a a Eis Te

mer

|
:
|

Page 5
That what Pleaseth Thee is the only thing done,
O Thou, the Eternal, the Formless One. [19]

When the hands, feet, body are soiled,

Water washes them pure.

When the clethes are spoiled,

Soap cleans them sure.

When the mind is polluted by Sin and Shame,
"Tis cleansed .by the Love of the Name.

The virtuous and the vicious are not mere echoes,
One carries along all that one does.

That one soweth, one himself reapeth,

And cometh and goeth as He Ordaineth. [20

Pilgrimages, Austerities, Mercy, Charity’,

Bring but honour small and paltry*,

One must Hear, Believe, Love the Name,

And Bathe at the sacred Fount within one’s frame,
For Worship there cannot be till virtues shine.

So pray : “Thine art all the virtues, Thine.

O Primal Word, Maya, Brahma’, Hail to Thee.

Thou that art Truth, Ever-Joy, Beauty*’.

What the time, season, day, month of creation?
Knows None’,

Not the Pundits, even if it be in the text of a Purdn ;
Nor the Qazi does who interprets the Quran‘.

Nor Yogi knows the date, season, month, but the One
Who Created the Universe, Knoweth alone.

How to describe Him, Praise Him, speak of Him, Know Him best 7
Yea, say they all they know, one wiser than the rest,
Great is the Master, Great His Name.

All that is, proceeds from Him.

He, who thinks of himself much, is vain,

And will look small in God's Domain. [2]

Countless the worlds beneath, countless the worlds above,
No limit is found, nor the Vedas have.

Eighteen thousand, say the Semitic Texts’.

(Tis not the last word.)

Yea, the Essence® alone is real.

He who counts doth fail in the deal.

Nanak : let us say, He is Great (He, the One),

And He alone Knows, yea, He alone, [22/

I. ‘Dotu* (wa) as in Sanskrit ga means ‘that which is given’.

2. Cf “cmt g & afer pafaqqad a areata aeafwaa 1a ga gaged at un eettarag qt

“They who make their practice to consist of nothing else but sacrifice and public charity, win only for them-
selves the lunar world ; these then return again."' (Prashonopanishod, 1, 9),

3, “Svasti* (Greetings), ‘Arh’ (Maya, in which sense it is also used in Guru Nanak's ‘Pakhni Onkar'), Bani (Word),
Barmao (Brahma), of the original, here have been translated as most modern Sikh scholars generally do, “Svasti" ig a
blessing meaning “Good be unto you" * (Rdia JH, Vivekdnanda). The idea here is that God Himself is the Primal Word
and the Creator: there is no other word (Qm or Kun, etc.), nor Moya, nor Brahe whose aid He seeks, He Himself being
allin all, Kahn Singh in his “Gur-Shabd Rainckér Mahin Kosh’ interprets it to mean '"Brahma's specch, beginning with
the words “Ari” and “Svesi","" which conveys littl sense.

4. Of “Saravam, Shivam, Sundrant”.

5. Cf, “But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, oot the angels of heaven, but my Father only"', (St.
Mathews XXIV, 36).

6. There is a reference to the age of the world in the Puranas, but the Guru dismisses it as of no significance.
The Sikh scholars interpret the phrase “Je Likhan Lekh Qurdn” as “they who are the scribes of the Quran". But the
Qazis only interpret it. mot write it,

7. The word ‘Xeieb' includes all semitic scriptures.

8. ‘Dhar (gra, arg) is from Sans, gig, meaning essence. At other places this term has been used to mean
Maya, the outgoing (of mind), metal, clement, Afman, quality, mature (habit), ignorance, senses etc,

1222222290 Guru-Granth Sahib
They who Praise, Him know not how Great is He,

As the rivulets know not the expanse of the sea

Into which they merge. The kmg whose dominion

Is like an ocean,

And hath wealth like a mountain,

Equals not a worm in whose heart Dwells the Lord. /23/

Limitless His Praise,

Limitless its Ways.

Limitless His Workings,

Limitless His Givings.

Limitless the sounds, limitless the sights,
Limitless the mysteries of His Mind.
Limitless the Creation, limitless the Expanse,
© countless struggle to find, who can 7

The more one says,

The more is yet to say.

Great is the Lord, High, High His Mansion.
He hath the Most Exalted Station.

To know the Highest of the High,

One may try

If one be as high as He.

0 He alone Knows how Great He be.

"Tis Grace that brings us Mercy. [24]

Great His Mercies, there is no telling :

He the Giver Gives, Himself covets nothing.
Warriors they all beg at His Door,

Yea, countless they, and countless more.

Some those His bounties win, . :

Suill say, they don't.

Countless such fools, to feed even them His Wont.
Countless are afflicted with Pain and Hunger.
Even these, O Bountiful, are Thy Blessing, Thy Honour.
Liberation from Bondage is upon Thy Will,

None else can tell.

If one were so foolish as to say he knows.

‘Tis he who gets the blows.

God alone Knows our needs and Gives.

Alas, how few will own even this.

He, whose heart He Filleth with Praise,

Nanak : he the King of kings is. [25]

Priceless His Virtues, priceless the Trade,

Priceless the Customers, priceless the Purchase,

Priceless the Dealers, priceless the Treasures,

Priceless the Weights, priceless the Measures.

Priceless the Devotion,

Priceless the Absorption.

Priceless the Law Divine,

Priceless the Master's Court—-His Shrine,

Priceless the Approval. priceless the Bounties,

Priceless the Command, priceless His Mercies,

Priceless beyond word, beyond thought,

They who seek to tell grow mute, knowing it not.

The Vedas say and the Puranas say,

And the learned they read, interpreting them as they-may.
Say the Brahmas, say the Indras,

Say the Gopis, say the Krishnas, P. 6
Say the Shivas, say the Siddhas,

Say the many, many Buddhas.

Gurv-Granth Sahih 9999929929999999999992999999999999999222999020099"

SPOS ECECECOSSSGSSESESES

Page 56 
Say the demons, say the gods,

Say the seers, say the sages!.

Some have said, same may say more,

Others have said and left the shores.

Hf as many more were to come and say,

Would they Fathom His Deeps? O nay.

As Great He is as Him it Pleaseth,

How Great is He, The True One alone Knoweth.
And he, who presumes and says he knows,

Is a fool among fools, as such he goes. [26]

What kind Thy Gate, what kind Thy abode, O Lord,
| Where Sittest Thou and Supportest us all ?

Countless the Harmonies, Countless Thy Minstrels,
Countless the Tunes, and Measures and Players.

O Sing to Thee Winds and Water and Fire,

And the Dharmardj* too doth Thee Admire.

Sing Chitras, Sing Guptas, the Keepers of Record,

Which the Dharmaraja See-eth and giveth the Award.

Sings Shiva, Sings Brahma, Sings goddess Parvati,

Looking neat and pretty.

Sing Indras on their Thrones,

Sing the gods in their throngs.

Sing tne Siddhas in meditation,

Sing the saints in ovation.

Sing the celibates, sing the zealots,

Sing the peaceful, sing the warriors.

Sing the Pundits, sing the Rishis,

Sing the Vedas, sing the Ages.

Sing the Mohinis* enchanting, beauteous,

Sing the earth, underworlds, heavens.

Sing the Jewels*, Thy Creation,

Sing the sixty-eight (shrines) in ovation.

Sing the warriors, mighty, brave,

Sing the sources of life four,

Sing the universe, carth, spheres,

Thou Sustdinest, Thy Creations.

Sing they all who Please but Thee,

Are steeped in Thee, Thy Devotees.

Sing countless more, one cannot tell ;

Nor think, nor Nanak shall.

Thou the Eternal, Truc, The Master,

Who Is, Shall Be, ever hereafter,

Yea, He the One who Made the Universe

Of various species, orders, colours :

Who Watcheth all what He Createth,

And as and what His Pleasure Suiteth.,

What He Wills, He Does and would ;

No, none shail tell Him what He should.

The Highest of the nigh, the King cf kings,

Nanak : His Will Works on ail His beings. {27}

Thy ear-rings Contentment, Humility thy bowl, thy wallet,
‘Intent on God'—the Ashes thou smear,
‘And thought of Death,” the Coat thou wear.

1. ‘Sur-nar’ and 1‘ Muni-jan literally mean 1ic¢ men and sages (or nacn of silence), respectively. “Naru" in
Vishnu Purana is a creature with limbs of o horse madd bitin body. ain

2. ‘Dharmardjé’ ot the lord of moral law, wha awards punishment according to a human's deeds recorded by
his two angels—Chitra (or Chit, conscious), and Gupfa (uncouscious). He iz also called “d the lord of death.

3. ‘Modbfnris" are the enchanting beauties of the heavenly (or India’s) world.'

4. According to a Puranic lore, Vishou churned the ocean to procure nectat for the gods slain in a bottle whh
the demons. Fourteen jewels were found in the process.

5. The four sources of creation are: (i) Egg, (2) Foetus, (3) Sweat, (4) ‘arth.
\
Chastity thy Way and Faith, thy Staff}.

And, if thou seckest the Ayee’s path’,

The One in cach and all thou hast to See,

And conquer the self in thee,

The world then would thine be.

Hail, Hail to Him, All-Hail ;

The Primal Being, the Pure Light*,

Sans Beginning, sans End‘, for ever alike. [28]

Knowledge thy food,

Compassion thy steward,

Divinity in thee, the horn thou blow,

He the Lord, all strung on Him, thou know.
To work miracies is vain, an empty show,

One Separated, another to Union attains :

We receive only what He Ordains§,

Hail, Hail to Him, Ali-Hail ;

The Primal Being, the Pure Light,

Sans Beginning, sans End, for ever alike, [29]

“Tis the Divine Mother (some say),
Who conceived in.a mysterious Way
The Deities Three, Approved :

One Creator, one Sustainer, one
Destroyer of the world,

But Nay ;

"Tis Will of the Lord that Sways
Us all, as He Ordains,

He See-eth all, none see-eth Him ;
A wonder of wonders that obtains,
Hail, Hai! to Him, All-Hatl :

The Primal Being, the Pure Light,
Sans Beginning, sans End, for ever alike, /30]

Everywhere His Seat, everywhere His Stall.

He put what He Willed in it once for all.

He Doeth, Createth and See-eth our needs,

© True He is, True are His Deeds.

Hail, Hail to Him, All-Hail ;

The Primal Being, the Pure Light,

Sans Beginning, sans End, for ever alike. {31]

With a hundred thousand tongues, nay, many times more,
If one were His Name a million times to utter :

(Not enough it would be).

Many steps on the Path that leads to the Lord,
And Unites Him with His bard.

Though the talk of Heavens

Even stirs the worms,

His Grace it is that each one Saves :

All else is false. 32)

1. Obviously these verses are addressed to the Yogis,
2. mre] (amé) : the highest—Ayee—order of the Fogis.

3, ‘Ameel": (Lit, that which is not blue, he. is colourless).

4. ‘Andhar' (Lit, that which cannot be ended). It should not be confused with Andhad or Anhad (Lit. unstruck

sound) or the lotus of the Yogis in the Uomana, opposite the heart.

§. Jodh Singh interprets it thus: “Souls are im a state of separation.
Reality. This endeavour is the cause of evolution and tho whole affair of the world is kept up by it. Every soul gets the
portion determined by its effort”. That this appears to be the correct sense is borne out by the Shafoka at the end of

the Japu : “Our actions keep us far, or near Him draw".

Guru-Granth Sahih O9O99DTIo99999>)

Page 58

It also means countless, infinite,

‘They strive to unite with ihe Supreme

BABSLOCCECOSSOOOASSEOSOESOOCOCHEOCCOGECL POSSOOCOSHESECCOSGHAE
No power to speak,

Or silence keep.

No power to beg, no power to give,

No power to die, no power to live,

No power to rule,

Or gather the soul.

No power to awaken the soul to Wisdom,

No power to find the way to Freedom!.

He alone hath the Power, He alone hath the Way.

And, of ourselves which high, which low, O none can say®. [337

Nights, Days, Seasons,

Air, Water, Fire, the Nether Regions :

In their midst is the Earth set,

As Dharma‘s, the Law's, seat.

Habitated by different peoples, beings, species,
Of various kinds, forms, qualities :

Are judged on what their Actions be,

By Him, the True One, Whose Court is True,
There sparkle the ones Approved, appointed,
And they, by His Grace, are Anointed,

There, O there, ‘tis known who's True, who's false:
"Tis he who's there that knows. 34]

“In here, to Dharma men confine.

Pray, now the Domain of Gyan define.”

Many the elements of Water, Air, Fire ;

Many the Shivas, Krishnas, (Him admire),
Many the Brahmas who create the beings

Of various forms, colours, kinds.

Many the fields of Action,

Many the Mounts of gold,

Many the Dhruvas* receiving instruction

(At His Threshold).

Many the Indras, Suns, Moons,

Many the stellars, many the earthly regions :
Many the Siddhas, Buddhas, Nathas,

Many the goddesses of myriad kinds.

Many the gods, demons, sages,

Many the Jewels born of oceans.

Many the norms of life,

Many, the forms of speech ;

Many the devotees of spirit, many the kings of kings,
Many, O many, are the forms of beings. [35/

1. This cannot be interpreted to mean that individual responsibility is thereby cancelled or that Sikhism
reaches a fatalistic outlook on life. It only suggests that as life and everything pertaining to it is directed by God's
ill, which an individual will cannot force, it is best to find within oneself what God's Will is and to attuné oneself to

it in a stare of equipoise (Sala). (See Invrovduetion).

2. Vir Singh trdnslates it thus : “He who thinks he has the cto act, let him act and sce its fruitlessness. For,
one by oneself cannot make oneself either high or low’. (Saathye Guru Granth, p. 161)

3. From moral. living (Dheren,) one proceeds to spiritual kKnowled@e (Jnana), or the knowledge of One-in-many ;
from spiritual knowledge to un-knowledge, humiltly or self-surrender (Suram), ‘Through self-surrender, one is ushered
into the realm of Grace (Karam Khanda), yea, into the Lord's Presence (Sach Afanda or the Abode of Truth).

Ch frien: ot val sata: aergera 1

wearetiy HEMTER wEaterepe i esther 1 NH
ae, 1X: GET STITH UT TA
Gare qead Sequyaea qoresia un esther nds

“Beyond the senses is the mind, beyond the mind the hi: t essence (budii’) ; beyond ihe essence the Great Self;
beyond the Great Self, the Highest Increate; beyond the Increate is verily the Man ; all comprehending He and far
beyond distinction’s power. Him if he knows the mortal is free and to deathlessness he goes."* (Kathopanishad (2-3-7,8)).

4. A Bhakxta, identified, according to the popular belief, with the polar star.
QIDIDDI® @uru-Granth Subib

In the Domain of knowledge, knowing abounds. e
Myriad kinds of joy there, sights, sounds.

But when the Domain of Surrender! doth one reach,

‘Tis through Beauty's speech

That one can talk. Such wondrous is the creation here, 8
Not one can tell: “Tis wonder sheer. P,
Here is inner Consciousness moulded,

And Reason fashioned,

And mind Illumined,

Understanding enlarged.

O here is the Vision of the godly trained, [36]

And then is the Domain of Grace®

Which expressed through Power’ is.

There are heroes brave and mighty,

Throbbing with the Spirit of the Almighty.

There are myriads of Sitas*, rapt in glory,

Beyond words is their Beauty.

Death or guile can cheat them not,

Yea, they in whose hearts Dwells the Lord.

The Devotees from all the spheres are here,

Who the Lord in their hearts wear,

And rejoice.

In the Domain of Truth, the Formless Abides,

He Watcheth what He Createth with Bounteous Eyes.
In it are all the worlds, universes, spheres,

Of which no lin.it, no count, there is,

World upon worlds of creation, He Commands,

All act here as He Demands.

He; who sees this, contemplates, is filled with joyous zeal ;
O, who can tell, “its hard as steel. 7]

Chastity the Smithy, Patience the Smith,
Understanding the Anvil, Knowledge the Tools,
Fire of Austerity, Bellows of Fear,

The Pot of devotion, in it melt thou Nectar.
The Word

In this True Mint is Coined.

They, on whom is His Grace, their way is this,
"Tis Grace that filleth the man with Bliss. [38]

1. “Saram Khond" has been interpreted by Jodh Singh and Teja Singh as the domain of spiritual effort (from
Sens. (a) and by Kapur Singh as introversion (as in the Sufi doctrine). Harnam Singh has translated it as humility,
sense of shame, self-surrender. The word has been employed elsewhere in the scripture too in the same sense, Vir
Singh interprets it as the “Domain of Bliss". (Santhya p. 164).

2. ‘Karn in the text is used in its Persian sense, meaning Grace, and not in the Sanskritic sense, where it
means ( @t) Kermea, or the law of cause and effect, or effort.

3. ‘Jor’ has been interpreted as power by Jodh Singh, who also translates ‘Xaram Khand" as the Domain of
Grace. Teja Singh, however, interprets ‘Karam Khand' as the Domain “of Practice and ‘Saram Khend’ as the Domain
of Spiritual Effort. The Guru, however, has emphasised throughout the Scripture that, in the ullimate analysis,
it is Grace through which ome attains unitive experience. The grouping of “Sach Khand’ with ‘Karm Khand* in the
same stanza also suggests the meaning given above. That the expression of Grace in life is power, is reinforced by other
verses in the GURU-GRANTH :

“I am the wrestler of God:
Meeting my Guru, the plume of my headgear flutters.” (Sri Rag, M. 5).

This is what -distinguishes Sikhism from the Opnaishadic doctrine which leads the seeker to the pingacle of self-
sufficient Peace by realising the identity of the soul and the oversoul and Jeaves it at that, In the Sikh creed, the
expression of realisation is Power, both spiritual and secular, for a Sikh's aim is not realised merely by an inmer
iMumination unless it leads also to the saving or deliverance of many more, (See the Shaloka at the end),

4, ‘Sito Sra’ has been translated by Harnam Singh as “inextricably knit’, and Yor’ as union.

Guru-Granth Sahib 9909992909999929999922009999999999922222999990904

te

Page 6
Air the Guru, Water the Father,

Great! Earth the Mother :

Nurses— Night and Day.

In whose lap the world doth play.

‘Our deeds, good and bad,

Are read

In the Presence of the Lord of Law :

Our Actions keep us far, or near Him draw ;

They whe Dwell on the Name, their Toil is o'er.

Glorious are their beings, Nanak, they save many more. [J/

So-Dar®, Rag Asa M3 i
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Lulightener.

What kind is Thy Gate, what kind Thy Abode, O Lord,

Where Sittest Thou, and.Supportest us all ?

There play to Thee myriads of players a myriad tunes,

And Sing to Thee myriads of heavenly Singers in a myriad measures.

Yea, Sing to Thee winds, water and fire,

And Sings also the Lord-justiciar sitting at Thy Door,

And Sing to Thee also Chitra and Gupta, the Scribes of men’s deeds,

On which the King of Dharma bases his judgment of men,

And Sing to Thee Shiva and Brahma and Parvati

And so they look beauteous, being Blest by Thee.

To Thee, at Thy Boor, Sing Indras seated on their thrones

Along with the throngs of other goddesses and gods,

And the Siddhas too,wrapt in contemplation, sing of Thee,

As do the seers who reficet on no other thought but Thine.

Of Thee sing the celibates and men of Truth and Contentment and warriors mighty aad brave, PLS

And the Pundits too, and the holy Aisiis,

Along with their Vedas through ages upon ages.

The enticing heavenly houris also Sing of Thee,

As also Sing the earth, the heavens and the underworlds.

And the Jewels too, created by Thee sing of Thee,

Along with the sixty-eight pilgiiim-stations.

And, sing to Thee warfiors and heroes of immeasurable prowess and power,

Along with the four sources of creation.

And the whole universe sings to Thee, and all its parts, and all the spheres,

For it is Thou who established them and kept them where they are.

(But), sing to Thee only those with whom Thou art Pieased and who are inebriated with the Essence
of Thy Worship.

How many more do also sing to Thee, O Lord, whom | cannot even visualise.

Thou for ever art, for ever art Thou alone,

The Truc One, whose Name is Truth :

Thou art the Creator of all creation, who is, will be, and will go not ever,

Who Created the universe of various species, colours and kinds :

And Who Watches all what He Creates and as and what Suits His Glory and Pleasure..

The Lord Doth only what Pleaseth Him, and no one can command Him to do what He woulda’t,

For, He is the King of kings, and so Nanak liveth m His Will. /J]

1, “Adahor* im Sanskrit means stretched out, expansive, hence greet. In Sankhya, it means Cosmic Iotelligence,
or the first product of the Cosmic Substance (Pratriri),

2. So-Dar" is the heading of the compasition for the following Verse (which is also iacluded in the Japu with
minor modifications and which begins with these words). ‘This and the succeeding eight verses are recited as the evening
prayer by the de devout.

3. The word in the text is Jfeh/a (also promounced as Mohalla}, literally msaning the Lord's Bride,
Mohalla, according to Dabistun-i-Mazalub, meuns he on whom has descended God. The figures i, 2, etc., signify whether
it is the composition of the Ist Master (Nanak), or the Ind (Angad), the 3rd (Amar Dis), the deh { (Ram Beis), the Sth
(Arjun), ¢ or the 9th Master (Tegh Bahadur). As would be seen, ail the Gurus style themselves as “Nanak’.
Asi M.1

They, who near of the Greatness of the Lord, say He is Great,
But he alone Knows who Sees (Him).
© Priceless, Indescribable Thou -
They who describe Thee Merge in Thee. [1]
© Great, O High, our Master,
Unfathomable, of Virtues Immeasurable,
No one knows how vast is Thy Expanse. [/-Pause/
The wise meno of Intuition exercised their Wisdom and Intuition,
The Valuators put value on Thee ;
The Wise, the Seer, and men of Holiness and Piety
Could enunciate but little of Thy Worth. {2]
All Truth, all goodness, (the merit of) austerities,
All miracles, all merits of the adepts,
The intuitive powers—without Thee, no one has found.
e, on whom is Thy Grace, has them; not another. 3]
Who, pray, is the utterer
That can utter the whole of Thy Treasureful Virtues ?
Him, on whom Thou Bestowest (Thy Mercy), cannot but bask in it.
Says Nanak, “The Truth alone Saves us, yea, the Truth alone’, [4-2]

Asa M. 1

Lutter Thy Name and J live. I forget Thee and J die.

How hard it is to say Thy Name, O True One !

When one Hungers for Thy True Name, O Lord,

His Woes wither away. ji]

© mother, why should I forsake Him,

Who is True, whose Name is Truth? //J-Pause]

The Greatness of the True Name
Many have uttered—but found not even a little of its True Worth.
Even if the whole universe rings

(With His Praise), He neither becomes any the greater, nor lesser. [2/
He neither dies, nor is there any to grieve for Him.

He Gives and His Giving knows no bounds.

This alone is His Virtue that He alone is :

Neither there was any other, nor will there ever be. [3]

He is as Great as is His Beneficence,

Yea, He who made the night to follow the day. P. 10
He, who forgets Him, is indeed a low-caste wretch :

Nanak : without the Lord's Name one is but a low worm!, 4-3]

Rag Gujri M. 4

I beseech thee, O True Guru, the True being, God's own,

We, the humble and the lowly, have sought thy Refuge :

Take pity and awaken the Lord's Name within us. [J]

O my Friend, my Guru, Hlumine my heart with the Lord's Name.

The Name Revealed to me by the Guru is the Friend of my life.

To Meditate upon Thee, O Lord, is my daily routine. /{J-Pause]

They are Thy own, their Destiny is high, who Trust in Thee and are Athirst for Thee.

They are satiated only by Thy Name.

In the Society of the Holy, their virtues shine forth, {2/

They, who Tasted not the Name of the Lord, they the unfortunate ones, é

Are handed over to the Fama, : . .

They, who sought not the Shelter of the Guru, in the Society of the Holy, fie on them, O, fie is on their
life to come, [3/

1. sata (aarfa), aaa : of low birth.
2. atefa (avarfa) : the life to come,

Guru-Granth Salih 9999999909999999999992999999999999092229990990997

Page 6
[ 14]

They, who were received in the sanctuary of the Guru, in the core of their beings it was so writ by God?.
Blessed, blessed is the Society of the Holy where I Taste ;
The Essence of the Lord, and the Lord's Name is Revealed to me. [4-4/

Rag Gujri M. 5

Why, thou mind, thinkest of a life of care-worn effort

When God Himself is Engaged in thy care’?

Even the life created in the stone, its feed the Lord Provides. [J

O Master of Maya, he, who joined the Society of the Saints,

Swam across (the Sea of Material Existence).

Through the Grace of God, he received the Highest Bliss ;

And the Dry Wood blossomed forth. //-Pawse ;

Neither mother, nor father, nor friends, nor sons, nor wife

Are thy mainstay.

God Gives sustenance to all ; why, O life, then fear corrodes thy mind? [2]
Thousands of miles the swallows travel, leaving their

Offspring behind :

Have you ever thought of this,

Who feeds them, takes them to their feed 9* (‘Tis their mother) who keeps them ever in her mind. /3/
The (nine) treasures, the eightesn miracles, the Lord

Keeps in the Palms of His Hands.

Nanak, © Lord, is a Sacrifice unto Thee, ever and for evermore,

Whose Expanse he knows not. [4-5]

Rag Asa M. 4, So-Purukhu

O Thou, the Person on High, the Purest of the pure, Infinite, Unfathomable,

O Thou, the True Creator, on whom all Meditate,

© Thou, the Beneficent Lord, all belong to Thee.

O Saints, Meditate on Him that all your Woes may depart.

He Himself is the Master, He the one who Serves.

Who am I, but a mere man? /[//

Thou, O Lord, art in the hearts of all, ingrained in their beings ; in Thee are all contained. P. I!
Some (seemingly) are the givers and others the seckers of their gifts,

(But) all this is Thy Own Wonderful Play.

(For), Thou art the Giver and Thou the Receiver,

I Know of no one other than Thee.

Thou, the Eternal, Endless, the Transcendent God, which of Thy Virtues shall [ chime ?
© Lord, I am a Sacrifice unto those that Serve Thee, }

They, who Meditate on Thee, live in Peace ;

They are the ones Saved, and deathless have they become,

They, who Meditate on the Fearless Lord, all their fear goes.

They, who Serve their Master, Merge in the Being of God.

Blessed, Blessed are they : Nanak is a Sacrifice unto them, /3/

Countless are Thy Devotees, Lord, who recount Thy Merits.

Countless worship Thee, utter Thee, suffer penances for Thee.

Countless are the readers of the Smiritis, the Shastras,

And those doing six kinds of works®, in accordance with their faith.

But, Blessed alone are the Devotees who are in Thy Pleasure, my Muster. /4]

Thou art the Being Primeval, the Infinite, the Creator ; no one is as great as art Thou.
Through ages, Thou alone hast been for ever, the same, Moveless Creator. :
That alone happens what Thou Willest ; that alone works.

Thou Created the whole universe :

And when Thou Willest, it will submerge (in Thee).

Nanak sings the Praises of the Lord who Knoweth all about all. /5-J]

1. Lit. oo their forheads it was so written by God.

2. Cf. “Consider the ravens : for they neither sow nor reap: and God feedeth them: how much more are ye better
than the fowls." (57, Lake, WA, 24).

_ 3. According to Manusmriti, the six kinds of works arc : reading, teaching, performing yajna, leading yajna, and
giving and receiving of alms.

200 Guru-Granth Sahi
O, Thou the Creator, the True, my Master,
That alone happens what Thou Willest,
And I get what Thou Givest me. {/-Pause}
All belong to Thee, O Lord, all Meditate on Thee.
They, on whom is Thy Mercy, obtain the Jewel of Thy Name.
The God-wards have attained (to Thee) :
The self-willed have lost Thee.:
‘Thou Separated them Thyself ; and, it is Thou that United them again. [J]
‘Thou art the River, all Thy creatures abide in Thee.
None else is there without Thee, O Lord !
And all the Creation is Thy Miracle.
The ones United, Separate ; those Separated, Unite. [2]
And, he alone will Know Thee
To whom Thou wilt be Revealed.
He alone will utter Thy Praises for ever.
They, who Served Thee, lived in Peace.
And all-too-spontaneously, Merged in Thy Name. [3/
Thou art the Creator, from Thee all Doing flows.
But for Thee there is not another.
Thou alone Doest, See-est, Knowest, O Lord: ! P, 12
Sayeth Nanak, “Thou art Revealed to the one who looketh Thy-wards alone”. [4-2]

Asai M, 1

In that (world’s) pool does ihe man abide,

In which the Lord Puts _ the water of Fire,

And the Mud of attachment, into which the feet get stuck.

Many, O, many have I seen ensnared (by the Marsh). [J]

Mindest thou why not Him, O ignorant one,

Torsaking whom thy virtues wither away. / /-Pause]

says Nanak‘neither Chastity, nor Truth, nor Wisdom

Do I, the Ignorant wretch, have in life, O Lord.

I, therefore, seek humbly the refuge of those who forget Thee not. /2-3]

Asa M. 5

Thou hast obtained from thy God a human's body,

Now alone is the time*® to Attain to thy Lord.

Of no avail are thy other works :

Join the Society of the Holy and Utter nought but the Lord's Name. [J]
Dedicate? thyself to Swimming across the Sea (of Material Existence).

Thy life is being wasted away, contaminated by Maya. [J-Pause/

Thou hast not assembled thyself, nor taken to Meditation,

Nor to Penance, nor Religion,
Nor known what it is to Serve the Holy, and thy King, the Lord-God.

Says Nanak: “Impurities attach to my name :
But I surrender to Thee, O Lord, now cover my shame”, /2-4]

Sohila‘ : Rag Gauri Deepaki, M. 1
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the EHtermal, the Tulightener.

In whichever state (of mind) is God Dwelt upon, and (His Name) Recited,
Attain thou to that state, Meditate upon Him and sing His Praises. [ J)
Sing the Praises of my Lord, the Fear-free,

Iam a Sacrifice unto the Song that brings the mind home’. [J-Pause]

1. te. Desire.

2. aba! (atta) : gral (eel turn, opportunity),

3.) mdarit (torfiz) is a Persian word meaning to fulfil, carry out, arrange for.
4, Literally, “the Song of Praise’. [t is generally recited before retiring to bed.
3. Lit, that which brings eternal peace,

Guru Granth Sabib 090999992999999999920009299999999999222299090090"

BAVEGSCL ECOCHISE SCOCOCOCOSHPEOCOECOOHCCS CE LISAEOPESALAOOSERE

iN

Page 6
He, who Protects us all, each day, and Watches us all,

He, whose Gifts cannot be evaluated ;

How shall we then evaluate the Giver? [2/

The Day of my rendezvous is fixed :

Pour oil on the threshold, my mates?,

And bless me that I Aitain to the Union of my Lord. [3]
In hoines all over the Courier calls each day,

So forget not the One who calls :

For the Day must come for us all. f4—J/]

Rag Asa M. 1

Six are the systems*, six their teachers, of six kinds the ways they tedch ;

But the Teacher of teachers is He, the Lord alone, though manifested as many. [J]
In whichever Way are His Praises sung,

That Way alone is worthy of thy praise. {/-Pause]

The second, the minute, the hour, the solar and the lunar day*, the changing seasons,
Ave all created by the same, jone sun :

(Thus) doth permeate through the many the God, the One alone. {2-2/

Bag Dhandsari M. 1

The sky is the salver ; the sun and the moon are the lamps, P. 13
The spheres of stars are studded in it as jewels ;

The chandan-scented winds from the Malai mountain’ wave
And scatter across the fragrance of myriads of flowers. /J/
(Thus) is Thy Worship performed,

O Thou Destroyer of fear.

The Unstruck Melody rings*

And maketh Music of the Word as if on the tender lips of a flute. {J-Pause]
Thousands are Thy eyes, yet hast Thou eyes ?

Thousands are Thy forms, yet hast Thou a form ?
Thousands are Thy lotus-feet, yet hast Thou feet ?
Thousands are Thy noses to smell, yet hast Thou a nose,

O Wonder of wonders ?

Thou art the Spirit that Pervades all :

It is Thy Light, that lights all hearts.

Through the Guru's Wiidom does Thy Light burnish,

And that what Pleases Thee becomes Thy Worship. /3]
(Like the black-bee) I crave day and night for the honey

Of Thy Lotus-Feet.

Grant Nanak, the Chatrik, the Nectar of Thy Mercy, Lord,
That he Merges in Thy Name. [4-3]

Rag Gauri Poorbi M. 4

Lust and anger infest the City (of the body) :

But when f meet with the Saimts, I break through both,

T was Destined to meet with the Guru,

And, lo, I am filled with the Love of God's Domain. /J/
Salute, with joined palms, the Saints; it isan act of great merit ;
Lie prostrate before them. {J-Pausej

i. According to the Hindu custom, mustard oil is poured over the threshold at the time of the bride's first
arrival after marriage at her in-laws, asan auspicious omen. The date of marriage is fixed similarly by the family priest
in accordance with the auspicious position of the stars that are supposed to guide men's destinies,

2. Lift, The message (of marriage, here death).

3. Lit. houses (/.c. schools of Hindu thought).

4. In the original text, Indian divisions of time, then current, are given.

5. Hee (Hara) is a mountain in Madras, over which grows ihe scented chandanwood.

6. ‘Anfad shabda’ or ‘Nada’ is the melody that is produced unstruck. Yoga describesit as am orchestral mel
of ten instruments including a drum, cymbals, flute, conch, bells, mrridang, the music of spheres and clouds, etc., whic

the Yogi hears on entering the Tenth Door, i.c., the Self. The Guru denies its import to the Sikh who experiences the joy
of that melody in the Guru's Word alone.

he ee

=DIDBDOIIIII9OO Guru-Granth Sahib
The worshippers of Maya do not relish the Taste of God,
Far in their hearts is the thorn of I-amness :

And, as they walk along, it hurts them and they grieve and suifer the pangs of Death. [2

Those, who are God's Own, are Merged in His Name:
They ‘ve cast away the pangs of birth and death.

I've found God, the Deathless, whose Glory rings through all the worlds and universes. [3]

We, the meek and lowly, belong to Thee, O Lord,
Save us, O Save us, Thou Highest of the high !
Thy Name is Nanak’s only Mainstay, and in Thy Name lies his Peace.

Rag Gauri Poorbi M, 5

Hark, O my friend, | beseech thee : now is the time for thee to Serve the Holy.

For if one earns Merit here, one lives in Bliss Hereafter. [J]
Thy life wears off each day, each night ;

Go, call on the Guru, and fulfil thy Destiny, /7-Pause]
Worthless is the world’s sojourn if torn by’ Doubt,

Only the Wise-in-God are Saved.

He, whom God Awakens and Feeds on His Nectar,

He Realises the Mystery that is unutterable. {27

Deal only in what thou camest here for,

And, through the Guru, God will enter into thy abode.

Thy mind will come home and find its seat in the Great Peace,
And thy Round willend. /3/

O Thou, the Knower of our inmost desires, the Purusha, the Creator,
Fulfil also the Desire of my mind, ;

Nanak, Thy Slave, wants no other happiness but this

That he becomes the Dust treaded over by Thy Saints. [4-5]
Sri Rag M. 1

If my palace were raised of jewels and inlaid with rubies,

And pleasantly plastered with musk and saffron, and sandal-paste'.

Would then I tose myself and forget the Lord's Name? [J

Let my body and soul burn without Thee.

There is no other abode for me but Thine, O Lord! /J-Pause/

If the earth were to be of diamonds,

And my bedstead were strung with rubies,

And the dancing houri, her face sparkling like the shining bead, invited me with her gestures tender,
Would then 7 lose myself and forget the Lord's Name? /2/

If I were an ascetic centred on the Self,

And possessed the power to perform miracles.

And could assume now a subtle, now a manifest body*.

And the people had faith in me for this:

Would then | lose my head and forget Thy Name? /3/

Even if I were a king, a gatherer of armies, and my seat were on a throne,
And I commanded people about and about,

All that would be vain.

If I forget Thee, O my Loved Lord! /4-//

Sri Rag M. 1

If aeons were my age,
And air my food and drink? ;
And I caged myself in a cave where entered neither the sun nor the moon ;
i And were I not to sleep even in dream, .
' I would still not be able to value Thee, nor Thy Name, O Lord. /J/]
The True Lord hath His Seat in Himself.
I only hear of His Merits.
If He were to be Merciful, He would Create His craving’ in me, /f-Pause]
If I were to be pressed like a reed-mat, ground like grain in a mill,
If I were to burn (alive) in fire,
And mix with the ashes,
I] would still not be able to value Thee, nor Thy Name, O Lord. [2]
If | were a bird and trailed across a hundred skies,
And remained unseen, and ate nought, nor drank,
! I would still not be able to value Thee, nor Thy Name, O Lord, /3/ P.15
: If 1 read through millions of pages and knew their mysterious intent,
If I wrote with an ocean of ink with the speed of winds,
1 would still be not able to value Thee, nor Thy Name, O Lord. /4-2/

Sri Rag M. 1

Within limits do we speak, within limits do we eat ;

Within limits do we walk, within limits do we hear and see ;

Within limits do we breathe : why ask the wise for this ? [J]

Friend, by this world is man deluded through May3.

‘The Blind have forgotten the Lord’s Name and are neither here nor there. /{J-Patse]

lL. Zi. Chandan brought from the Malai mountain.

2. According to Yoga Swira of Patanjali “by Sanyama on the form of body, the power of comprehension
being suspended and the connection between the light of the eye (of others) aad of the form of the body being severed,
there follows disappearance of the body." (IIL, 21)

FETT STAT TT Tel: TEAST WUT
3, nif? (afranrg) (from Sans. attearrg food). According to Yoga Sutra of Patanjali, “a Fogi who concentrates
on the pit of the throat, there is in him cessation of hunger and thirst.” (1H, 30), “ssg) aqfeqqrartagha:” uzi30n
4. gunfe (mare) : (Arabic, gyr), craving. *


[19 ]

One is born to live for a while and then he dies :

But where one's Account is settled, there no one keeps one’s company.

All those who cry for us, cry in vain. [2]

All say the Lord is the Greatest of the great,

But no one could find His True Worth. By our mere utterance of it, He rises no higher.
O Lord, Thou art the Truc Master, the entire universe overflows with Thy Creation. /3/
The lowliest of the lowly, the lowest of the low-born,

Nanak seeks their company. The friendship of the great is vain.

For, where the weak are cared for, there doth Thy Mercy rain. [4-3

Sri Rag M. 1

Avarice is (like) the (barking) dog, falsehood (like) the (unclean) sweeper, cheating (like) the eating of a
CATCHSS |

Slander is the dirt that my tongue tastes :

And anger is the fire that burns me like a Chandé/’,

I indulge* in nothing but self-esteem :

See, these are my doings, Q Lord. /J/

Friend, speech is that which brings us honour,

And, Good are they who are judged Good at the Lord's Door.

The rest are evil-doers who are wont to cry, {/-Pauwse]

Possessed are we of the flavours of gold and silver and women and scents and horses and cushions and
sweets and meats :

In which corner of the heart, then, ts the Lord's Name to find its seat? [2/ oy

Speech is that which brings us honour. ‘

To be sour-tongued is to destroy oneself, O foolish mind! '

They alone are Good whom He Favours. 7

Why speak, or think, of the rest? /3/ a

They alone have the Wisdom, the Honour, the means of life, ‘

Who Wear the Lord in their hearts.

Their praise one cannot chime ; no one is beauteous without them.

Nanak : they, on whom His Grace is not, are devoted neither to Charity nor to the Lord's Name. [4-4]

Sri Rag M. 1

Our God, the Giver, has Himself intoxicated our minds with the potion* of falsehood :

The egotists have forgotten Death and revelled for a while ;

The (truc) Suis have received the Truth and they keep to the Court of the Lord. /i/
Nanak : consider the True One alone to be True

Serving whom one attains Peace and finds Honour. /J-Pause/

Truth is the bitter wine’ which is fermented not out of molasses but the (Lord's) True Name.
lam a Sacrifice unto those P, 16
Who hear the True Name and dilate upon it.

The mind is (truly) intoxicated only if it finds a Place in His Presence. [2]

They, who Bathe at the Fount of the Lord’s Name

And saturate themselves with the fragrance of Charity,

Their faces Sparkle ; this is the gift of gifts,

Tell of thy Woes to Him who has the power to make thee care-free. f3}

Why forsake Him who has Given thee life and Soul ?

All that we eat and wear is impure without Him.

Nanak : all that is in His Will is sacred ; all else is vain. [4-5]

Sri Rag M. 1
Burn thy avarice, and pounding it, prepare the ink,
And, make thy intelligence pure like paper to write on.

With the pen of Love let thy mind, the writer, write on it as the Guru instructs :
Write thou of His Praise, of the Lord’s Name and of the Wisdom that He is Infinite. /J]

I. Those charged with burning dead bodies at the cremation ground.
2. gman (vara) : Lif. (six kinds of} taste (gq) like sour (aa), etc.
3. aGs' (Tatar) is a Persian word meaning a pill.

4. Re aa de erga! (@y er qe argu) : Lit. Truth (rg) isa wine (pat) without (aaa) sugar (a3), ie., its
taste seems bitter,

Guru-Granth Sahih BIQ9DVQCSSO99"9R9: !
Page 6

Friend, write out an account

Which when checked up (at the Court of the Lord) proves True. [I-Pause]

There, where one finds eternal Bliss and Honour,

His Face (alone) is Anointed whose mind is filled with the Lord's Name.

It is the Lord’s Grace that blesses us with it ; all else is airy talk. [2]

One comes and another goes ; one calls oneself a leader (of men) ;

One is a beggar-born, another holds a huge court,

(But), ‘tis “ one goes into the yond, that one knows one's worth ; O, without the Lord's Name all olse is
vain. '

In Thy mighty Fear, O Lord, [ wear myself out:

For even they that called themselves lords and kings, were reduced to dust,

For, when one passes out of life, all one's false attachments are snapped. [4-6]

Sri Rag M. 1

To believe in (Thy Name) is to taste the sweets ;

To hear (Thy Name) is to taste the salty dishes ;

To utter (Thy Name) is to taste the sour foods,

To sing (Thy Name) is to taste the spicy fare !

To love single-mindedly is to taste thirty-six kinds of delicacies ;

But he, on whom is the Lord's Grace, his way is this. [J]

Friend, all other foods, all other pleasures, are vain,

For, they fill the mind with Evil and make the body writhe in Pain. [J-Pause]

To dye oneself in the Lord's Name is to wear red ;

To wear white is to practise Purity and Charity ;

To wear blue is to erase black spots (from the mind) ;

To wear robes of honour is to Meditate on the Lotus-Feet of the Lord.

Wear waist-band of Contentment and gather the Wealth and the Beauty of His Name. [2]

To wear all else is vain :

For it fills the mind with Evil and makes the body writhe in Pain. [J/-Pause]

The horses, saddles and satchels of gold are contained in the Way that leads to Thy Knowledge, O Lord;

To run after Virtue is to wield a speac*, sword, & bow and arrows :

The (kingly) drum and the flag are the Honour with which Iam known (by Thee); my caste is Thy
Pleasure. /{3/

Any other ride is vain :

For it fills the mind with Evil and makes the body writhe in Pain,’ [/-Pause]

The pleasure of a house, a castle, I derive from Thy Name ;

Thy Grace is my family.

That command is good that Pleases Thee—the rest is fruitless prattle. P. 17

Nanak : the Truc King seeks no counsel (and Does what He Wills). [4]

The rest is all vain:

For, it fills the mind with Evil and makes the body writhe in Pain. [J-Pause] [4-7]

Sri Rag M. I

Tf one’s body be of saffron, and the sharp tongue! of jewels, and one breathes in the scented breath of
chandan, :

If one has girdled and been anointed at the sixty-eight pilgrim-stations,

And in one’s mind has burst the Light of knowledge,

One must Praise one’s God, the Treasure of all Virtues. J]

Friend, any other knowledge is false :

Practise it howsoever one may, one’s effort will remain vain. © {/—Pause]

If the people worship thee, and call thee a seer, ‘

If thou hast a name and thou art considered a miracle man‘,

If thy honour be of no account to thy God, thy station is false, 2]

1. wee ore at2 (aren es stm): Lit. to make mysic ate) is to taste the condiments (s7gz)

2. gan (xen) is quiver, mt (abr) spear, Some (ardz) sword-belt. i

3. ufest (afaar) is a swift stream near Bilkeshwar. It signifies man’s sharp tongue.

4. taa (fig) iz mot merely an ascetic, but also a miracle man. See Yoga Sutra of Patanjali: “There arise from
monification after the destruction of impurities occult powers of the body and the senses". (IT, 43)

arofaattiat Wrerarerre: Wee a
They whom the Guru has Appointed, them no one can degrade ;
(For), in their hearts they treasure the Lord's Name.
And through it are they known,
They Worship the Name, believe in nothing but the Lord's Name, which is the Eternal Truth, 3)
(And those that don’t) their bodies return to dust.
What would then happen to their souls ?
For, all their cleverness is of no avail, and they depart, wailing.
Nanak : they, who forsake the Lord's Name, know not what becomes of them, in the Court of the
Lord. /4-&/
Sri Rag M, 1

The woman of Merit scatters Merit ; the one without Merit writhes in distress.

If she wants to seck her Lord, (let her know that) He wouldn't be Mct through falsehood.
There is neither the boat, nor raft, about ; how will one go across the River where our Lord Abides? [J]
My Perfect Master Sits on the Throne, eternally ;

And (only) if He so Wills, we find the Truth immeasurable. /J-—Pause/

God is like a beautiful Temple in which are studded the Rubies and the Jewels,

And Pearls and pure Diamonds : He’s the enticing Fortress of Gold.

How shall one mount up to Him without a ladder and See Him ?

Without Meditating upon Him, who, pray, is thy Enlightener? [2/

To attain to His Naine, the Guru is the ladder, Guru the boat, Guru the raft,

The ship. the place of pilgrimage, the river.

If He, the Lord, so Wills, I become Pure, and I go to Bathe in the Pool of Truth. /3/
All call Him Perfect, He Abides on His Throne.

All His seats are sacred ; eternally, through Him, the Perfect One,

One becomes Detached even when Attached.

Nanak : if one Meets with the Perfect One, one's virtues will shine forth forsooth, [4-9]

Sri Rag M. 1

Come, dear sisters, limb of my limbs, come, clasp me in your embrace,

Come, let us as one recite the Gospel of our Lord, the Powerful.

He, the True Master, has all the Merit—we, all the demerit. 7]

O my Creator, all that is, is through Thy Power.

J rely only on this : that where Thou art, no one else may be sought. [f-Pause]

Ask the Bride for what Merit did she Enjoy her Spouse so well?

(Says she :) “I was content with Him, was in Peace, was Bedecked beauteously, and spoke honey to
Him.”

He, the Joyous One, is Met only when one hearkens to the Guru's Word. /2/ P. 18

How wonderful js Thy Nature, O Lord, how wonderful are Thy Gifts ?

How vast is Thy Creation that tells of Thy Merits ?

In what manifold colours, through high and low, Thou Manifestest Thyself! /3]

When one Meets with the True One, the Truth is Revealed and in it one Merges.

When one receives the Guru's instruction, one begins to Fear one’s Lord,

One's Intuition is Awakened and one-receives Honour in His Court.

‘Nanak : the True King of Himself Unites thee with Himself, yea, He the Lord, thy God, [4-70]

Sri Rag M. 1

How fortunate that I was Saved and the Ego in me? was stilled :

When I found my God's Trust, the Evil in me turned into Good.

I renounced my formative will? and the noise of reason, when | Met with my Master, the Care-free. [J]
O mind, one sheds one's fear only through the Lord's Truth.

How shail we become fearless if we do not Fear the Lord and Merge in His Word. [/-Pause]
How far can one tell of Him, for-His Praise is limitless.

Many are the seekers ; He, the One, is the only Giver,

He, who Gave us life and soul, Gives us Peace when He Comes into us. 2)

The world is like a dream, like a play : in an instant the play is over.

Some attain to His Union, others depart in Separation.

All that is in His Will shall happen ; who else can do a thing? /3/

1. wang (eerg) : Lit. in my home.
2. wey (sea) : dimunitive of Fag, Meaning formative will or the imaginative faculty that makes plans for
the future.
The God-wards buy up, and Trade in. the True Merchandise.
They, who Deal in Truth, on them is the Pleasure of the Guru. :
Nanak : he who Deals in the True Merchandise. will know what Truth is, [4-///

Sri Rag M. 1

As the metal merges in its kind, so does the man of prayer in His God.

He is deep-dyed in Red, the Colour of Truth.

Only those Content attain the Lord's Truth ; and they recite the Name of God single-mindedly.  [1/

O brother. [ am as dust before the Holy ;

In the Society of the Holy, one attains to the Guru, who is like the Kama-dhenw, the giver of Fepucet
~Pause

That beauteous seat is on High where stands the Castle cf God.

By True actions do we find in ourselves? the Love of our Spouse.

The mind is Instructed in the Wisdom of the Guru, and the Sou! through inner Knowledge, /2/

Within our three-pronged* activity. our Doubts and Woes will remain.

How, without the Guru, can one be Released from the Triad® and find Peace and Equipoise ?

It is by realising God in our innerselves that He Blesses us with His Grace and Washes our Dirt off. [2/

_ Without God, there is no Home-coming, nor do our Sins depart.

If we Meditate only on the Word and Iook upto nothing else, (we are Saved).
Says Nanak, “I am a Sacrifice unto him,
Who himself Sees, and helps others to See, God." [4-2

Sri Rag M. 1

Accursed is the Bride who loves one other than her Lord.

She is like the wall of sand that wears off night and day.

Without the Word, one finds no Peace,

Nor the Woes depart without the Lord. [Ij

Of no avail is the decking of the bride, if she has no spouse to go'to. :

She obtains no support here and Hereafter : she is treated as false and of nose. [J~Pause] P. 19

The true and wise farmer knows

That one sows the seed only after one has tilled the land and furrowed it.

So too does ne Lord's Name grow, the Treasure of treasures, and ane is Anointed’ with the Lord's
race, /2/ ; ‘

What use is the culture of the man who, having knowledge, Knows not the Guru ?

The egocentrics walk in Darkness and are blind to the Lord's Name.

Their comings and goings cease not, and they're born to die and be born again to be wasted away. [3]

If a woman uses the fragrant perfumes and with saffron fills the parting of the hair,

And applies chandan-scent to the body and sweetens her breath with the betel-leaf mixed with camphor,

If she is not accepted by her lord, all her flavourings are of no avail. . {4

And, all her enjoyment is vain, all her decorations are:false.

Till one finds the Secret of the Word, one finds not a Place of Honour in the God's Court.

Nanak : Blessed, Blessed is the Bride who loves her Spouse. /5-/3]

Sri Rag M. t

When the soul departs, dreadful is the empty carcass ;

The fire of the body leaves and ceases the smoke of breath : .

All one’s five sense-organs’ then cry that they were beguiled by Duality. {Jj

© fool, gather nothing but Geod, and Meditate on Ram.

Ego and Avarice are enticing ; so are all deceived. {/-Pause}

They, who have forgotten the Lord's Name and devoted themselves to another tusk,

They burn in the fire of Duality, and are burnt off by the Fire of Desire.

They alone, whom the Guru Saved, came up ; the rest were Drowned in the whirlpool of Strife. {2]

1. Indra’s mythical cow which is believed to Fulfil all one’s wishes.

2. wa wa (8% Ge) : Le., at the threshold of our own home.

3. argh amy ehefa (are aq drarfz) > Lit, by dwelling on our Self,

4. fafafa (fafafia) : Lit, of three ways (fafa), namely, faa (collected from the past), yeaa (that what has
commenced), and fase (what is being done).

3. That is, three modes of action—Safvik (traditional piety), Rajes (Passion), and Tamas (Darkness).

6. alae (trang) : Lit. imprint, sign, pass-word, flag.

7. wg $8 (99 wt) : Ce, the five Inanindriyas, namely, the Powers of hearing, touching, seeing, tasting and
amelling.
Their avarice goes, goes their Attachment and envy,

Goes also their ego, their strife, their anger, and their love of the great Illusion,

On whom js the (race of God : they attain to the Lord's Truth, their mind being ever in a State of
Poise’, 73:

By True living they find the Truth and Receive the Wisdom of the Guru.

They are neither born, nor do they die ; their comings and goings are ended.

Nanak : they, the Blessed ones, are Honoured in the Lord’s Court, and are offered the Robe of Honour
(by God). f4-J4/

Sri Rag M. 1

My body is burnt to ashes ; my mind is rusted", being attached to Maya,

To my demerits dance my steps ; falsehood calls the tune,

Without the Word, one 1s knocked about now this way, now that,

And, through Duality, are Drowned boat-loads of men. [J]

O my mind, you will Swim across (the Sea of Existence) only with the Raft of the Word.

They, who Realise not the Word through the Guru, they are born only to die : they come and go again
and over again. /J-Pause] ;

Pure is the body wherein abides the (Lord's) Truc Name.

The one, who Fears the Lord and is filled with the Lord's Truth, .

Whose tongue Tastes only the Truth,

On him is the Grace of the True One :

And he goes not through the Fire again. {2/

From the True One came the wind ; from the wind came the water ;

From the water sprang the three worlds ; and He, the Lord, Pervaded all.

Pray, how can the Pure one be soiled ? For he, that is dyed in the Pure Word, has Honour. [3]

When our mind is content with the Lord’s Truth, God's Grace is upon us,

The body of five elements? is then filled with the Fear of the True One, and His True Presence fills ous
minds ; .

And, Nanak, we forsake the path of Error: and the Guru saves our Honour, /{4-J5]

= iss

Sri Rag M.1 -

Nanak : the Boat of Truth Ferries us across, through the Wisdom of the Guru,
(Else), it is a (mere) coming-and-going for myriads of men full of ego.
The self-willed are Drowned, the God-wards are saved by Truth, /7/
How can one Swim Across, unaided by the Guru, and attain Peace ?
Keep me, O Lord, as Thou Willest, for I have no one else to go to but Thee. /J-—Pause]
Here, the woods are on fire’, and there the tender shoots sprout again’,
All are Merged in Him whence they came ; for He, the True One, Pervades all.
He it is who Unites us with Himself in His True Court. /2/
Every moment I seek to Meditate on Thee, O Lord, and never never to forget Thee.
And the more Thou comest into me, the Guru’s Word tastes Nectar-sweet.
Thine is the mind, Thine the body, Thou art my Master ; rid me of my Ego and Merge me in Thee, [3]
O Thou, who Created the universe made up of the thee worlds.
The Guru-wards bask in Thy Light : the self-willed fool gropes in Darkness.
He who sees the Light pervading all for ever, and Realises the Essence of the Guru's Way,
Realises the God in himself. [4] ‘ a : ;
- Nanak ; Blessed is he who is {Merged in the True One and awakens in himseif the attributes of Him:
Who contents himself with His Name and offers his body* and soul to the Lord, /5-/6]

1. fsa (freq) : *Niradha is the transformation of mind at the moments of interception," (Yega Sutra, IN, 9)
' rte fatirgierra: 300

It is a state of mind of the Yogi in unconscious trance (46i// Samaadhi), when he is distracted by nothing. According to the
Guru, the mind of the wise-in-God (GurmaéA) is ever in this state without any external aid, etc,
2. Hag (WE) : (Sans. qvge) the impure matter that is separated on iron being melted,
3. da ga (te qa): fe. five tanmitras or mahahhutded (great beings) are the prototypes'of Aether, fire, air,
water and earth which combine to form the human body.
4, 39 (ra): from Sans. qa:, the jungle fire. ;
5, Le, Life dies only to be re-born, Or, if it is death here, there is birth elsewhere and so the world goes on.
6. . fil (fg) : from Sans. farw, that which is gathered, i.¢., the body. :

BASSI COC EC OSSSSSSSOCOCOCOCCOGHSEOREBCOCE COSC ECOCELECECOGOS

Page 72 . 
[24]

Sri Rag M.1

Hark, my dear friend, Unite with thy Lord ;

Now, now, is the time.

The body remains only till it is in bloom and one breathes.

Without Merit, it is all vain, dust returning to the dust. //)

O my mind, reap some Gain before thou goest Home,

Praise thy God's Name, by God"s Grace, and quench thy Fire. [J—Pauwse/

We hear and weave stories and read and write and understand a huge load of knowledge,
But night and day our desires increase and we are plagued by vanity.

He, the Care-free, who is Unknowable, is Known truly through the Wisdom of the Guru. /2/
All our cleverness works not, nor our loving associations with myriads of men.

Without the Society of the Holy, quenches not thy thirst.

Without the (Lord's) Name, thy Woes burn thee down.

O my Soul, Meditate on the Lord and Know thyself that thou art Saved. 3)

T have sold out myself to the Guru, body and soul,

And Him, whom we sought in all the three worlds, we Saw.

Yea, Nanak, it is the Guru through whom we Attain to our Union with the Lord. [4-17]

Sri Rag M. 1

I fear not death, nor do J crave for life :

I seek Thee who Supports us all and in whose Will we live and enjoy :

Thou, who Abidest in me through the Guru's Grace,

Thou, who Determinest my Destiny as Thou Willest. [J

O my Soul, Meditate on God, and Believe in Him.

Thy inner Fire will be quenched and thou shalt be Wise in His Wisdom. / J-Pause/

Know thyself and Meet thy Teacher to cast thy Doubts away. P. Zi

The Home that awaits thee hereafter, that thou reachest in this very life by stilling (thy ego).

The unbeaten Melody that thou seekest to hear, hear it thou in the instruction of the Guru: /2]

Yea, in His Word which burns thy ego down.

Tam a Sacrifice unto him who Serves the Guru.

He is Honoured with the Robe at the Lord's Court in whose mouth Abides the Name of the Lord. [3]

Whesever I sec, there is the union of spirit and energy’ in the Creation, which our Lord, the God,
tvades.

Our body is bound down by the Three Modes ; whoever comes into the world plays within their limits.

The self-willed are Separated from the Lord and are in Anguish. [4]

If the wandering mind comes Home and Dyes itself Red in the Fear of the Lord,

And feeds itself on Higher Wisdom, it hungers no more.

Subdue thy Ego, therefore, O Nanak, and Unite with thy Lord that thou grievest no more /5-/8/

Sri Rag M. 1

My mind is unwise that it is lured away by Greed,

And is swayed not by the Word, and its evil makes me come and go.

If one meets with the Guru, the Seer, one finds the Treasure of Virtue. [JI]

O my mind, give up thy ‘I-amness’,

Serve thou the Guru-God, the Pool (of immortality), to Receive Honour at the True Court. {J/-Pawse/

Utter the Name of the Lord, night and day, through the Grace of the Guru, and know thou that God
is a Treasure.

If one learns Wisdom im the Society of the Holy, one gets Peace and enjoys all Pleasures.

Serve thy Master night and day, therefore, and Meditate on the Lord’s Name that the Guru blest thee

. with. /2/ 7

If one practises falsehood, his pastime is to deride his Teacher.

He wanders in Doubt and grieves, and the Yama beats him flat*,

The self-willed are never at Peace as are the God-wards steeped in His Wonder*, [3]

Why then curse thyself with the ways of the world ?

For, thy Lord accepts nothing but the Truth.

Serve thy Guru, the Friend of the Lord, and submit to His Way,

And forget not His Name, O Nanak, and thou wilt be graced with His Approval. [4-J9]

1. “Shiv-Shakri', has been employed in the text to denote conscious Furusha and the unconscious matter
(Prakriti) ; God and Maya ; soul and ignorance ; dispassion and desire ; spirit and energy, etc.

2. wears (Agr) : (from Persian Khirman) is the place where grain is threshed.

3. Ay (TAT) : (Arabic) meaning wonderful, pure.
Sri Rag M. 1

Even if one forgets one’s Lord for an instant, it is a great affliction of the mind.
For, how can we attain Honour at the Lord’s Court if He Abides not within us ?
When we meet with the Guru, we gather Peace and the Fire (of Desire) is quenched by reciting the

Praises (of God). [J]
O my mind, utter the Praises of the Lord. night and day.
They, who forget not the Lord's Name even for an instant, rare, how rare, are they in the world !
{ i-Pause J
If the Soul of man Merges in the Over-soul, and the mind is Attuned to the Higher Mind of the Guru,
Then the desire for violence, ego and the wander-lust of his mind depart ; so do our Doubts and Woes,
The Ged-man in whose mind Abjides the Lord, the Guru Unites him with the Supreme. /2/
If we surrender our body like a woman (to our Master), He Enjoys it.
Love not then thet which but 1s a passing show,
(But), by the Grace of the Guru, Enjoy like the Married ones the Bed of the Spouse. [3]
Quench thy Four Fires! with the God's cool Water.
In thyself will then the Lotus (of Wisdom) flower. and the (Lord's) Nectar will fill thee whole. P. 22
Nanak : if one makes friends with the Lord, one Attains the Lord’s Truth in the Lord's Court, (4-20)

Sri Rig M. 1

Recite the Name of the Lord through the Instruction of the Guru.

Apply thy mind to the Touchstone of Truth (and see) if thou weighest thy Weight.

No one has found its worth, the Jewel of thy heart is priceless, © [1]

O Brother, the Lord, our Diamond, Resides in the Guru,

And the Guru one finds in the Sanctuary of the Holy who, night and day, recite, through the Word,
the Glories of the Lord. [J-Pause]

Truth is my Capital-stock and the Merchandise ; I found it through the Light imparted by the Guru,

As fire is quenched with water, so are our desires quenched (by the Lord's Name). .
The wild Courier of Death then touches us not, and we Swim across the Ocean (of Material Existence),

The Guru-wards like not the Untruth and are Dyed in nothing else but the Truth.

The worshippers of power like not the God's Truth and build on false foundations.

Tf one loves Truth, one meets with the Guru, and one Merges oneself in the True One. [3]
In thy mind are the Jewels, the Rubies, the Pearls, the Diamonds*,

The Lord’s Name is the True Merchandise and the Capital ;

The Name that Pervades all hearts.

Nanak : if we find our Lord through the Guru, His Grace is upon us. /¢-2//

Sri Rag M. 1

If one wanders through the worlds, one’s Fire of Doubt is extinguished not,

Nor is washed one’s inner Dirt : O cursed be the life and the robe such a life wears.

One can worship not the Lord except through the Guru's Word, = [1/

O my mind, quench thy Fire with the help of the Guru,

Fill thy mind with the Word and still thy Ego and Desire. [7-Pawse}

The Jewel of the mind is priceless ; but through the Name of the Lord alone does it find cognition.

If ~ Keep to the Society of the Holy, we Attain to God, and we Remember God through the Grace

of the Guru,

One burns down one’s Ego, and attains Peace and like water mingles with the Water®. [2]

They, who Remember not the Name of the Lord, they come and go without Merit.

He, who met not with the Guru, is caught up in the Whirlpooi (of Desire).
‘Priceless is the Jewel of our mind, but see how it goes for a copper! [3]

They, on whom is the Pleasure of the Guru,

They are the-ones fulfilled, and Wise.

With the help of the Guru, they Swim across the Sea of Existence and find Honour in the Lord's Court.
Nanak : Pure is their Repute, and in their minds is struck the Music of the Lord’s Name. ° [4-22]

1. ie. violence, attachment, wrath and greed. (See Var Majh M. 1)
2. dt (gre)=naie’ : diamond.

3. wae (awe) : (Sans, wferry), water.

i are
[ 26 ]

Sri Rag M. 1

O ye Traders, Trade in the True Merchandise,
Buy ye the Goods that last with ye.
The Buyer is All-wise ; let Him receive the Goods with Pleasure. / J]
Brother, utter the Name of thy Lord with thy whole mind.
If one takes along with hun the Praise of the Lord, the Lord will View it with Joy, {/-Pause)
They, whose Merchandise is not Truth, how shall they find Peace ?
If we deal in Falsehood, our mind and body become False. P. 23
And, like the ensnared deer, one comes to great Grief and cries. /2/]
The faise Coins are not sent to the Treasury’ ; they see not the Guru-God.
The False ones have no Station, nor Honour ; (for) no one wins through Falsehood.
They, who Trade in Falsehood. come and go without Honour, [3
Nanak : Instruct thy mind, and Praise thy God through the Guru's Word,
They, who are Dyed in the Lord's Name, they are oppressed not (by Sin) nor Doubt.
Meditate, therefore. on God, and keep the Fearless Lord in thy heart : for in it lies thy Profit. [4-23]
Sri Rag M. 1
Riches, beauty and flowers are but the guests of a few days.
Like the Pabban® Jeaves, they wither away" as they sprout, /J/
Enjoy thyself, my love, till thy beauty is green,
When thy brief days tire out, and thy coat wears off, //-Pause]
Thou goest, O my dear. beauteous one, to sleep in the grave.
1, who am torn by Doubt, will also go the same way—who now cry for the departed ones in my sad,
tender voice’, /2/]
Hast thou heard not, O my beauty, the Call from the Yond with thy own ears,
That one goes to one’s In-laws at last, and one’s Parents can keep one not forever? /3/
If one sleeps.in one’s Parent's home (unmindful of one’s True Destiny), one is robbed in the broad
aylight®,
Nanak : One thus scatters away the Flowers and gathers alone the Weeds, {4-24
Sri Rag M. 1

He, the Lord of Taste, is the Enjoyer ; He indeed is the Pleasure that He Enjoys.

He is the Bride*, He also the Spouse in Bed with her. [J]

He it is who Pervades all ; He the Master who Sports. [/-Pause/

He's the fish, He the fisherman, He’ the net, He the river :

He the iron balls with the net ; He the ruby that one finds (in the mythical fish), /2}

He Lives and Sports in many ways ; yea, He the Sparkling Jewel.

He Enjoys those that are His, but look at me (the wretched one torn away from Him)! [3]

Nanak prays, “Listen to my supplication, .

O Thou, who art both the pool and the goose (in it) ;

And the lotus, and also the kamina flower’ and the one who enjoys their sights and is pleased”, [4-25]
Sri Rag M. 1

Thy body is the farm, thy actions the seed ; it’s watered by the Name of God in whose hands is the

whole earth®,
Thy mind is the farmer, and when the Tree’ sprouts in thy Soul, thou attainest to the State of

Nirvan. fl]
Why pride thyself, O ignorant one, on Maya, the great Illusion ?
Thy father, sons, wife and mother, keep not thy company in the end, / Pause]
1. 3 (ata) : (From Persian Poreh), treasure,

2, Trumpp translates it as the lotus-plant, taking this to be its meaning in Sindhi. In Sindhi, however, it
signifies another flower, Nilofar. 1f the word is derived from the Sanskrit word Padmini (weft), ihen it would mean a

small lotus.

3. qveqe (yet) : (From Sindhi Wye, meaning Fz, to go.) .

4. dal der gual det ste} afte (eet were gait trai seit arfir) : 1 (a) too (a}) would go (Ser); 1, of two.
minds (g-+-H21), mow grieving in low (giz1) voice (az). ; ; : . .

5. fast (fircit) : carly morn. ‘

6. gear (arr): bridal dress. :

7. The lotus flowers by day, the Kamina by night. The verse would thus mean: He, who is the sun and also

8. mfgeret (erferait) ; He who holds the earth (Ada) im his hands (uel).

ABQOSAeSIago Guru-Granth Salrib
Weed! thy evil desires out, and let thy Soul Meditate (on thy Lord);

And abstain from Sin and practise Contemplation and Austerity,

That Thy Lotus flowers and Honey drips into thee®. [2 ,

Gather thyself, and remember Death in all the three* stages of thy life.

And see nought but the Transcendent God in the ten directions and in the eighteen-fold wonder of.

nature, and lo, thou art Saved by the Lord. [3-26]
Sri Rag M. I

If Good actions be thy farm, and thy seed be the Word, watered by the Way of Truth, P. 24
The growth will then be of Faith which brings the knowledge of Heaven and Hell. [i]

Wot by mere talk is He Attained, O fool, :

In the pride of our possessions and the glamour of our beauty, we waste our life away. /J-Pause]
The mud of Sin sticks to us, we, act like a frog who knows not that he lives with the lotus.

The bluck-bee teaches us the lesson (of love) cach day ; but we mind it not.” {2/

Thy mind hears not, sees not like the wind, and clings to the great [llusion. ;
The Grace of God is on them and they alone are His who Meditate on Him single-mindedly, [3]

One keeps fast for thirty days and says his prayers five times in a day; but sees not that Satan? may

wash away their Merits. .
Says Nanak : “When one must go the way of death, why should one gather these goods which go not
along with us." {4-27}
Sri Rag M. 1,

He is the Master*; by Him is the world kept in bloom.

O Blessed its He who has kept the seas and the earth together. [J]

Death must come to all, O Mullah, ;

Why not then abide in the Fear of the Lord? /J-Panse/ :

One is a Mullah and a Qazi only if one understands the Mystery of the Lord’s Name.

Howsoever learned a person be, one remains not when his days are over”. [2] ;

He alone is the Qazi who has abandoned his ego and has the Lord's Name as his Mainstay.

He, the True Creator, is, shall be, and will for ever remain. [3/

One recites the prayer five times and reads the Quran and the semitic texts ; ;

(But) knows one not that when the grave calls, one’s eats and drinks will to him be of no avail ? [4-28]

Sri Rag M. 1

Within me is the Dog (of Avarice), and also* the Bitches (of Desire) :
They are wild each morn and bark and yelp.

My dagger is of Falsehood ; to deceive and eat the Carcass is my profession.
So wild’ am I,O my God! /1/

I listened not to the talk of Honour, nor did I care to do good Deeds.
And with dreadful habits do | keep company.

Thy Name alone helps the world Swim across (the Ocean of Existence).
This alone is my Hope ; this alone is my Mainstay. /J-Pause]

Night and day, I run others down ;

My eye is always on the other man’s household.

Avarice and Anger abide with me like the Chandal :

So evilam I, Q my God! /2]

1. fagyr (frgar) ; From Sans. gy to till, weed out. .

2. Ho sre) (ga arerarg) : Lit. honey (4) out-oozes (mm) from Sans #lara:, to ooze out),

3. gin AUBd wRa Hand, (ale TIarEd! arect ways), Le. the body of twenty seven fatvas : five subtle, five manifest,
five Jnanindriyas, five Karmindriyas, five life-winds, mind and reason, Sankhya believes in 25 fatvas, and Yoga in 26,
The Verse would literally mean : “And who gathers (fa) the 27 (atq-4-puaraa) tarvas abiding (qa) in the body".

4. =r (ret) : (Marathi), three. ;

5. fata, (@arq) ; Saran is an Ethiopic word. As source of evil, its idea originated with the Persians in the form.

of Ahriman. From them, it travelled into Judaism and Christianity, and from these into Islam. Sikhism does not believe
in any such entity, God being recognised a3 the only source of good and evil.
6. H@e! (agat) : (Arabic), He who delivers (of bondage). [tis an attribute of God in the Qurin. Obviously,

there is 4 pun on the word in this verse. wOffpat, as verb, means that which is in bloom.
7. yret (rf) : a measure of 25 seers for measuring grain, now out of use.
8. gfe (qe) : ie, secondly, also. oe
9. greg (ures) ; (from Sans. anges, the bowman), living on hunting, etc., h¢nee wild. et

SMOBEGECUCOGOSOSESSASSOOSOGOCAOIOLOSEOELC COS SEOESSCUCOCOSS:

!
:
:
|
:
|

dl
My wear is soft, but my heart ts set on robbing the people.
Tam a deceiver, my Lord, and deceive the whole world.

The more clever I am, the more load (of Sins) I carry.

Like mad, I live my Lord! [3]

I, the ungrateful wretch, who has betrayed Thy salt, O Lord,
With what face shall I face Thee, a sinner, a sneak ?

Says Nanak, the lowly, after a great thought :

So wild am 1,0 my Lord! [4-29],

Sri Rag M. 1

Throughout the creation, man is endowed with the same consciousness (of Ego).

And, not one is without it.

And as is our consciousness, so is the way.

And on il is our account built and man comes and goes. [J] P, 25
Why practise cleverness, © life,

When He, the Lord above, can Give and Take away what He Gives, ina moment. /1-Pause]
Thine is all life, my Lord, Thou art its (Master),

Why art Thou then enraged, O Lord, with Thy men ?

If Thou in anger be,

Still they are Thine, Thou theirs. [2]

We bark out evil ; and Thou weighest (us) in the Balance of Thy Grace.

Where the Deeds are good, there is perfect mind too.

Without these, the mind is of less and less avail. {3]

Prays Nanak : “What kind is the man of Wisdom ?"

He who Knows himself, knows alone.

He who, graced by the Guru, Reflects (on the Word)

Is the wisest of the wise, and is Honoured at the Lord's Door. [4-30]

Sri Rag M. 1

Thou art the River of Wisdom ; how can I, a mere fish, know Thy Expanse ?
I See Thee all around me : without Thee, I lose my life. /J/

I see not the fisherman’, nor the net,

But when comes Pain, I call on Thee. {J-Pouse]

Thou Pervadest all ; 1 thought Thou art far.

But whatever I do, I do in Thy Presence.

Thou See-est me ; [ pretend that Thou See-est not.

Of no avail 1 am to Thee ; nor have I realised the Glory of Thy Name. [2/
Whatever Thou Givest, I eat.

There is no Door other than Thine ; whither else then shall [ go 7

Prays Nanak : “My life and body are Thine, /3/

Thou art near, and far, and in the middle,

Thou See-est by Thyself, Hearest by Thyself, and Createst all by Thyself :
And, whatever Pleaseth Thy Will, that alone prevails." {4-31 /

Sri Rag M. 1

Of what can the created one be proud ?

For, the Creator alone has the Power to Give.

If He Willeth, He Giveth ; if not, He Giveth not.

What can the one created do by oneself? [1

Truc is He and Truth it is that He Loves. ;

The Blind one wanders about in the Darkness of Vanity. /{J-Pause]

1. qafs (aefir) : Vir Singh's translation of this term as ego seems to be more reliable.
2. AG (ra) ; Is it a corrupt form of the Persian Mahi (-gir) meaning the fisherman ?
He, whose plants are we : He, whose garden? is (this world),

Names He (also) the trees, according to their fruit*.

So does a man flow as his mind be, and so does he get the Fruit, as is his Destiny.
What he sows, he also reaps. [2]

False is the wall (of life), false the mason,

If we taste the insipid taste only of our raw minds.

If the Lord so Wills, it comes right with us.

(But), without the Lord's Name, Nanak, we are of no account. [3-32]

Sri Rag M. 1

Maya, the greal Deceiver, deceives him not, nor the dagger (of lust) hurts him,
Who lives as God Wills.
But the man hungers and craves for more and more. [J]
Without oil, how will the lamp be lighted? {/-Pause]
With the oil of Wisdom, gathered from the sacred books,
And wick of (the Lord's) Fear, light thy life's lamp with the torch of Truth: [2]
And thy Lord wilt thou Meet. [J-Pause/
If one devotes oneself to the Word?,
And Serves one’s Lord, one gathers Peace.
. The world but comes and goes. [3]
He who dedicates himself to the service of others in the world,
He gets a Seat of Honour in the Lord’s Court.
Says Nanak, “Thus alone one lives in Ever-joy*". [4-33]

Sri Rag M. 3
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Eulightenec.

Serve thou the True Guru lovingly, and with single-minded Devotion ; ;
And, know thou that the True Guru is the holiest of the holy who fulfils all the Desires of thy mind,
(From him) one gathers the Blessing, the Fruit, as the heart longs. .

Seek then the Lord's Name ; Meditate on it, and, through the Name, enter thou the Realm of Bliss, [J]
O my mind, taste the Essence of the Lord that thy Thirst departs.

Those men of God, who tasted it, Merged in Equipoise. [/-Pause]

They, who Served the True Guru, found the Treasure of the Lord's Name.

Into them came the Essence of God, and they lost the Ego of their minds. , —
Their Intuition flowered, like the lotus, and they attuned themselves to the Lord in the state of Equipoise.

Their minds became Pure and God Pervaded their beings,and they received Honour at His Court. [2]
Rare, O rare, are they who Serve the True Guru,

Who still their Ego and Avarice and wear the Lord in their hearts.

Sacrifice am I unte them, who Cherish the Lord’s Name.

They alone are in Peace, through the four ages, who love the Infinite Name of the Lord. {3/
Meeting with the Guru, we receive the (Lord's) Name, and the Thirst of Attachment goes.
Our mind is satiated with God and we become Detached, even when attached (to the world).

I am a Sacrifice unto them who Tasted the Love of God.

(But), says Nanak, we receive the True Name, the Treasure of Good, only through the Grace of the

Lord. /4-I-34]
Sri Rag M. 3

If we wander about in the world, wearing all kinds of coats, while the mind commits Sin,
We mount not to the Castle of God, and die to be born again in the womb. = /{I/

O my mind. keep thyself Detached even in thy household.
If one practises the Truth, and holds his Desire and does good Deeds, his mind is Illumined by the

Guru's Grace, /{/-Pause}

1, oar} (arg): From Sans. wr, garden,

2. ma (ung): fit essence.
3, meter (areftat) i¢., in Bani (Fan/) or the Word.

Guru Gta "Be" FIVesSo495g909009992 begooooeneedconesseae

POLALOCCECOOGOGC SEOCOCOOOOOBOCOSOEOOOOE

|
[ 30 |

Fheoagh the Word is the mind conquered ; and one attains Salvation and the state of Bliss in one’s
ome,

Let us then recite the Name of God in the Society of the Haly,  /2/

If we enjoy myriads of women and rule over the nine divisions of the world,

We Receive ae Lord's Grace without the True Guru, and are cast into the womb again and over
again, [3 ‘

They, who wear the Necklace of God, and fix their minds on the Feet of the Guru (are holy).

All miraculous powers and the nine treasures of the world follow their steps and lo, they care not, [4]

That what God Wills, happens ; none else can do a thing. P. 27

Nanak lives by the Lord's Name which He, the Master, Gave to him, the natural way. {5-2-35//

Sri Rag M..3

He, who has Engaged! us all in His Task, to Him belong all the creatures,

The God-wards practise what is good and holy, and Truth is Revealed to their hearts.

He, in whom abides Truth, his Repute is True. .

They, who live with the Lord’s Truth, forsake not the Lord and they enter into themselves®, [7]
My Lord, without Thee. I have ne ene to call upen.

Thou art the Truth, Purest of the pure, and Thee I meet through the Word. //-Pawse/
They, who Realised the Word, Met Thee ; on them was Thy Grace. ;

In Duality, no one met Thee, and such a one was cast into the womb again and over again.
In all is He ; He works through all.

On whomsoever is His Grace, he Merges in the Lord's Name. [2/

The Pandits and the astrologers argue and quibble,

But their minds are turned, their intellect is corrupted, for Avarice abides in their hearts.
They wander through myriads* of species, and in their wanderings are laid waste.

They earn only what is in their destiny, and no one can erase it. [3]

The Service of the Guru is hard, one does it only if one Surrenders one’s head and loses one’s self,
If one Realises the Word, one Meets with the Lord, and one's Service then avails.

If we touch the philosopher's stonc, we become that, and our Light Merges in the All-Light.
They who are so Destined, them the True Guru meets. [4]

O my mind, wail not that thou art hungry, evermore hungry ;

For He, who Created myriads of species and is the Mainstay of all,

He, the Fearless One, Takes care of all.

Him, Nanak, Realise thou through the Guru, and so Enter the Door of Salvation. [5-3-36/

Sri Rag M. 3

They, who Heard (the Name) and Believed in it,

They entered into the Realm of the Self : . .

Through the Instruction of the Guru, they praised the Lord's Truth, and they Attained to their God,
the Treasure of Virtue.

I am a Sacrifice unto them who are Immersed in the Word of the Lord and are thus made Pure.

They, in whose heart is the Lord, Sce the Light in themsclves. ///

O my mind, Dwell on the Name of the Lord. . .

But they, in whose Destiny it was so Writ, they, the God-wards, alone were Attached to Him. /-—Pause/

O Seers, See that the Lord Abides so near and is All-pervasive.

They, who Realised Him, through the Guru's Word, they See His Presence. ;

They, who have the Merit, in their hearts abides the Lord ; He is far removed from iwen of evil intent.

The egocentrics are devoid of Merit : without the Name they die frustrated. [2/

They, who Heard and Believed in the Word of the Guru, they Dwelt on the Lord in their minds.

Their minds and bodies became Pure, for night and day they Merged themselves in His Worship.

False is the colour of the world, like safflawer's ; when it wears off, one gricves. P, 28

He, in whom is the Light of the Lord's Name, lives elernally. /3/

1. If we read fagata (ht as one word, the verse would then mean : “He, who governs the Universe, to Him

all belong”.

2. faaufe (Fraafe) : fa. the abode of Self.

3. By aula (wa Tecdlz): Accore’>g to the Hindu belief, the creation consists of eighty-four lakh Jivas
(9 lakhs in water, 10 lakhs in the air, 20 lakhs upon trees and in vegetation, 11 lakhs of -rawling insects, 30 lakhs of
quadrupeds and 4 lakhs of humans). The Jainas have a different classification.
He, who receives the gift of life and dedicates himself not to the Name of the Lord,

A foot-slip and he is no more ; he gets no Refuge Hereafter.

The time once lost returns not and one grieves when one passes away in the end. :
He, on whom ts the Lord's Grace, comes up and he Attunes his mind to the Lord. [4]

They all imitate (the ways of the Holy), but the self-willed Realise Him not.

The God-wards, whose hearts are Pure, their Dedication alone avails.

They Sing the Praises of the Lord, they Read of Him alone, and in the Song of Praise are they merged,

Their speech is Truth, for they are Attuned to the Name of the Lord, [5-4-37]

Sri Rag M. 3

6)
é)
2
e)
a
g)
e)
é)
J
e)
fh
e}
es
é)
e}
i
f)
=f
They, who Meditate on the Lord's Name single-mindedly and Dwell on the Word of the Guru, o
Their faces look Pure in the True Court of the Lord. 7
They Drink the Lord's Nectar eternally and Love the True Name. [Jj A
Brother, the Guru-wards always receive Honour, 3
Call then on thy Lord and wash off the Dirt of thy ego. [/-Pause/ J
The self-willed know not the Lord’s Name, without the Name they lose Honour. s;
They are torn by Duality and Jove not the Taste of the Word. ey
The worms of the Dirt seek and eat Dirt and abide init. [2] dy
They, who walk in the Will of the True Guru, their life avails. a
They Save their family : blessed is their mother. 3
But he alone Worships the Lord, on whom is His Grace. [3]
They, the God-wards, who Dwell on the Name and lose the pride of self, 3
They are Pure from within and without, and Merge in the Lord’s Truth.
Nanak : they are the ones Approved by the Lord, who Dwell on Him through the Guru's Word. [4-5-38]
Q
€
i)
8
a
2]
é)
e)
)
s)
a
)
a)
e)
i
al
é
e)
)
&)
é)
é)
e)
A
a

Sri Rag M. 3

The Devotees of God have the Wealth of God alone with them, and they seek the advice of the Guru in

their Trade,
They Praise the Lord for ever and ever, and their Capital-stock is the Support of the God's Name.

I Realised the Name of the Lord through the Perfect Guru: the Devotees of God have a limitless

Treasure. [Ij
O Brother, instruct thy mind,
That i idles not away its time and Meditates on the Lord's Name, through the Grace of the Guru.
J-Pause | ‘
What is the Worship of the Lord? It is His Love, and one Realises it if one Dwells on it, through the
Guru's Grace. ‘
Hypocrisy is not Worship ; in the talk of Duality is thy Death,
He, whose mind is Awakened by Inner Knowledge’,
Him one can distinguish from the rest. [2]
He alone Serves Him who Wears the Lord in his heart.
He offers his body and soul to his Lord and stills the Ego in himself.
Blessed is he ; he is the one Approved and he loses not the (Battle of Life). [3]
Through{ His ? Grace is the Lord Attained ; in no wise else. P, 29
Life in its myriads of species craves for Him, but the Lord is Met with if He so Wills,
Through the Guru, Nanak Received the Lord, and he Merged in His Name for ever.

Sri Rag M. 3

f4-6-39]

The Lord's Name is the Ocean of Peace,

Through the Guru is the Lord Attained.

Dwell on Him day after day,

And Merge imperceptibly in the Lord's Name.

Into thyself, then, comes the True Lord

And, His Praise is on thy tongue. fi]

Brother, the world is in Woe, for it is engrossed in Duality.

If ome “ Protection of the Guru, oné attains peace and Meditates on the Lord's Name for ever. *
-Pause

The True ones are not soiled in the mind, their Pure minds Dwell on the Lord alone.

Through the Guru, they Realise the Word, and they Immerse themselves in the Lord's Nectar-Name.

The Wisdom of the Guru burns bright in them and the Darkness of their Ignorance is dispelled, [2]

Sos

ss,

1. fade (fern) : (Sans. froe:), discrimination.
Guru-Granth Sahih 9999992990999999999999099999999999990920999999

FeHGSClCCECHSGBa

N

Page 80
[ 32 ]

The self-willed are Impure, and are-infected by the Disease of Desire.

Their Dirt is not washed off without the Lord and they are born to die like wretches,

They snort with the Illusion’ ;

Neither they belong to this (world), nor to the next. /3/

The Guru-wards are devoted to Contemplation and Austerity and they hold their desires, for they Love
the Lord's Name.

They Call on the Name of the Creator, the One alone. z

Nanak : Dwell thou on the Name of God, fer God alone is the Support of ali. {4-7-40/

Sri Rag M. 3

The Egocentric is engrossed in (his) Attachment (to the world); he can neither practise Detachment, nor
Renunciation.

He Realises not the Word, and Grieves for ever and loses Honour in the Lord's Court.

The God-wards shed their Ego, for they are Merged in the Lord’s Name and attain Peace. [J]

O my mind, Desire iures thee away night and day.

Serve thou the Guru and burn down? thy Attachment to attain the state of Detachedness in thy very
home. /J-Pause/

The God-wards do good Deeds and Flower, for the Love of God is a Renunciation that brings on Bliss.

They Call on the Lord night and day, and, stilling their Ego, they become care-free.

By good Fortune, I got the companionship of the Holy, and I Attained to the Lord in the Bliss of
Equipoise. f2]

He is the Saint, he the Renouncer of the world, in whose heart Dwells the Name of the Lord.

Anger touches not his core, for he has shed his self.

The Treasure of the Name is Revealed to him through the True Guru, and he Drinks-in the Essence of
God and is satiated. 3]

Whosoever found it, found it in the Society of the Holy ; when one’s Destiny is Awakened, one attains
to Renunciation.

The self-willed wander aimlessly ; they Realise not the True Guru and they are attached to Ego,

They, who are Merged in the Word, are Dyed in the Lord's Name ; but, without the Fear of the Lord,
how can He be Loved ? [4-8-41]

Sri Rag M, 3

In thy ‘home’ is the Merchandise ; in thyself is the Capital, O Trader,

Hold fast to the Lord’s Name at all times ; (but), only the God-wards Attain to it.

The Treasure of the Lord’s Name is inexhaustible ; but only the men of Destiny come by it. /{/]

O my mind, give up thy Ego and the evil of slander ;

And, call on God, the One, the Formiless,, through the Grace of the Guru. /J-Pause] P. 30

The Faces of those turned God-wards are Pure, for they Reflect on the Guru's Word.

They get Peace both-here and Hereafter, and Dwell] in their hearts on the Lord,

In their ‘home’ they Attain to the Lord's Mansion, Reflecting on the Guru's Word. /2/

He, whe turns his Face away from the Lord, has a black Forehead.

He writhes in Pain day and night and the Noose of Death is round* his neck,

He gets not Peace even in his dreams, and Anxiety tears at his heart. /3/

The Lord is the Giver of all ; He it is who Bestows Benediction.

One can say not on whom will be His Pleasure.

Nanak : we Attain to Him through the Guru, (not otherwise), and He alone Knows Himself. {¢-9-42]

Sri Rag M. 3

They, who Serve the True Lord, attain the Glory of Truth.

Through the Guru’s Grace, He Comes into our minds and Removes our Ego.

This mind is held only if He, the Lord, in His Grace, so Wills. {JJ

Brother, through the Guru, Meditate thou on the Name.

The Treasure of the Name is gathered in the mind, and one finds a Place in the Lord’s Mansion. / J-Pause]

The self-willed are blind in body and mind and they find no Rest.

They enter the Cycle of birth-and-death and Wail like the crow im a ruin.

Through the Jnstraction of the Guru, we get the Light of the Lord ; through the Guru’s Word, His
ame.

1, waged) (argent): Lit. cag wl, 4¢. ome, the potion which the thugs administered to their victims to
make them unconscious.
2. yore (Word) : (Sans. STAT), the flame of fire.

3. Fd a (ot re ar): Jit, searches or sees (WZ) him the Foma's noose (#2).
One is enveloped by the haze of Maya and the Darkness of the Three Modes,

Men of avarice dwell on the Other, even though they advertise their reading of the Vedas,

By (the Fire of) Desire are they burnt, and they are neither here nor there, (3!

In their love of Maya, they forget the Lord, their Father, who Supports us all.

Without the Guru, all are unconscious (of their Divinily), and are led astray by the Angel of Death.
Nanak : one comes up only through the Instruction of the Guru : so assemble thou the True Name (of

the Lord). /4-J0-43,
Sri Rag M. 3
He, who remains trapped by the three Modes, attains not to the Fourth State (of Bliss),
if He, the Lord, in His Mercy, Unites thee with Himself, in thy heart then Dwells His Name.
They, in whose treasure is Good, them the Lord Takes to the Society of the Holy. [Jy
Brother, abide thou in Truth, through the Instruction of the Guru.
Practise Truth, Live Truth, and Unite with the True Word, =/ /-Pause/
I am a Sacrifice unto them who Realised the Lord’s Name:
I'll shed my Ego and cling to their feet and walk in their Way.
One thus gets the Profit of the Lord’s Name and one Merges imperceptibly in it. {2
Without the Guru, one Mounts not to the Lord’s Castle, nor Attains to His Name.
Find thou the True Guru from whom one Receives the Lord’s Truth,
He kills the Devil in thee and Peace abides in thee, and whatever is His Will that thou aceept. /3/
As is the intensity of one’s Belief, so gathers one happiness.
No doubt there is-in it but rare is the one who loves thus.
Nanak : though different in form, the Guru and God? have the same Essence, but through the Word is
our Union (with the Guru). /¢-/ 1-44)
Sri Rag M. 3

One gives up the (Lord's) Nectar and is lured away by Poison, and serves other than Him, the Lord. P.31

One gives up one’s Faith, Realises not the Lord and passes one's nights and days in Woe.

The self-willed do not Dwell on the Lord's Name and are Drowned without cause. [Jj

O my mind, ever Dwell on the Name and seek the Refuge of the Lord.

When the Guru's Word Enters into thee, thou forgettest not the Lord. //-Pause/

This body is the plaything of Maya, in it abides the evil of Ego.

The Egocentric comes and goes and is born to die, losing his Honour,

In the Service of the True Guru, one gets eternal Peace and one’s Light is Merged in the All-Light. {2]

The Service of the True Guru is easy enough and one gets what one prays for.

(Through the Guru's Service one attains the merit of) Contemplation and Austeritics and one attains
the Lord's Truth, the body becomes Pure, and the Lord Comes to Reside in the heart :

One gets eternal Bliss and abides in Peace on Meeting with the Lord. /3/

lam a Sacrifice unto those who seek the Refuge of the Lord.
They Merge in Truth in a state of Equipoise and utter the Praise of the Lord at His Door.

Nanak : through His Grace is the Lord Attained, and through the Guru is one United with the Lord.
[4-12-45]

Sri Rag M. 3

The self-willed do works as a deserted woman decks herself.

But she enjoys not the bed with her lord and is thus wasted away (in fruitless wait).

She attains not to the mansion of the spouse, nor can she realise herself. [J]

Brother, single-mindedly then Call on Him, the Lord ;

In the Society of the Holy, one finds Him, and when one recites His Name one attains Peace. {/—-Pause/

Through the Guru, one enjoys eternally the station of the Wedded Life, and one Wears the Lord in
one’s heart.

(For) he, who speaks sweetly, and is humble in his ways, enioys the Bed of the Spouse.

That Bride alone is praiseworthy who loves her Lord intensely. [{2/

1. aia ye (ere oq), Le. the Fourth State or Turiya, which follows the three states of waking (Jagrar), dream-
ing (Swapne) and deep sleep (Sushupia). “Nor inwards consgjous, nor outwards conscious, nor conscious both ways ; nor
(yet) ingathered as to consciousness nar (even) conscious nor (yet) unconscious ; whal mone can see. nor grasp, por
comprehend, void of distinctive mark, unthinkable, past definition, naught but self-consciousness alone, thal ends all
going-out, peaceful, benign and secondless, this men think of as the Fourth State." (Mandukopanishad, 7)
aie: sat aigent areas: sat torr a sat ATTA I
FEAT ATR ee TS TTS
Tew Te aa Tage wp AAT A aT a fata: i
[ 34]

When one’s Destiny awakens (© friend), one meets with the True Guru.
From him depart Doubt and Woe and he attains Peace,

(For) he, who walks in the Will of the Lord, grieves not. [3] ;

In the Will of the Lord lies Nectar, but through Equipoise is He Attaimed.
They, in whose Destiny it lies, they shed their Ego,

(And) Dwell on the Lord's Name, through the Guru's Grace, and (thus) attain to the Lord's your 46)

Sri Rag M. 3

Knowing He is thy (only) Lord, offer Him thy body and soul,

And do the Deeds of the True Bride.

Thou wilt then meet with Truth imperceptibly and receive the Glory of Truth. [J/

O Brother, without the Guru, there is no Worship : ;

No one can Worship without the Guru, even if one craves for it. /J-~Pause]

‘Duality has made the Soul wander in endless transmigrations.

Without the Guru, there is no Sleep and one passes one’s Night in Agony.

Without the Word, one finds not one's Spouse, and wastes away one’s life in vain. [2]

Full of vanity, I wandered about in the whole world to gather wealth, P, 32

But wealth did not keep me company (in the other World).

The blind one did not Dwell on the Lord’s Name and was netted by the Yama, the Angel of Death.

When one meets the True Guru, one gathers (the True} Wealth and Remembers the Lordin the heart. {3]

They, who are Merged in the Name, Dwell on the Lord’s Name in their hearts :

They are the Purest of the pure, for they attain to the Poise of the Guru.

Their mind is Immersed in the Love of the Lord, and on their tongues is the Taste of the Lord’s Name.

Nanak : know thou that the colour which the Lord Himself Bestows upon thee will wear not oft 14-49)

— 14-47

Sri Rag M. 3

If the Guru in his Mercy so wills, one Calls on the Lord ; without the Guru, there is no Worship.

If the Guru Unites the seeker with himself, he Realises the Truth and becomes Pure.

God is Truth, True is His Word, and through the Word is one United with the Lord. /I/

Brother, why has one without Devotion come into being ?

He Serves not the Perfect Guru and wastes away his life in vain. /I-Pause/

He, the Lord, Himself is the Life of the world, He the Giver of Peace and Pleasure, and the One who
Forgives and Unites us with Himself.

What are these creatures before Him ? What can they say ?

The Guru himself bestows Honour, himself he takes his Service. /2/

Seeing one's family, one falls in love with it, but it goes not along with us in the end.

By Serving the Guru, one Atlains to the Lord, whose Value one cannot measure.

The Lord is my Friend : He alone is my Support in the end, /3/

One may say what one wills and make others too say, bui, without the Guru one’s Ego departs not.

The Lord is the Lover of the Devotees : if He Bestows His Grace, He Comes into our hearts.

Nanak : the Lord alone gives us the consciousness of His Praise and Bestows Honour of Himself,
through the Guru, [4-/5-48]

Sri Rag M, 3

Blessed is the mether, blessed and foremost the father

Of one who seeks Peace by Serving the True Guru, and subdues his Ego.

The Holy men Serve at His Door and Attain to the Lord, the Treasure-house of Virtue. Jj

O my mmd, Call on the Lord, through the Mercy of the Guru.

If the Word of the Guru abides in thee, thy body and mind become Pure. [J-Pause]

In His Grace the Lord Entered my Home of Himself and Met me.

If we Praise Him through the Guru's Word, He Dyes us in His Colour, the natural way,

And we become Pure, and Merge in the Pure One, and then there is no Separation from the True Lord.

2
He alone Does what He Wills, and no one other than Him can do a thing. (}
The True Guru has United those for long Separated from their Lord and taken them into account!.
He, the Lord, alone Moves the world ; no one other than Him can do (a thing). /3]
Thy mind and body are Imbued with the Lord’s Ecstasy ; and one gives up one's Ego and Evil.
And in one’s mind Dwells the Name of the Fearless and the Formless Lord,
Nanak : He Unites thee with Himself through the True Word, yea, He thy Infinite Lord. [4-J6-49]

1. WS ule (F% ore) : fit. to register on the page (iS). In the language of Hindu accountancy, to take into
account.
Sri Rag M. 3

Thy Lord is the Treasure-house of Virtue : His Greatness one cannot measure.

By mere talk’, ‘one finds Him not: "tis when one sheds one’s Ego that one Attains to Him, P. 33

On meeting the True Guru, one fears the Lord, and then, of Himself, He Enters one’s heart. [1]

Brother, not all can Realise their Lord.

Without Realising the Real, to work is to Jose the Object of one’s life, /{J-Pause/

They, who Tasted the Lord's Name, Loved it, without it they wandered about in Doubt.

For, the True Name is the Nectar, one can say not its Praise,

He, who Drinks it, is Approved of by the Lord, and he Merges in the True Word. = /{2/

If He, the One, were to Give, we Receive ; what else can we receive ?

The Gift is im the hands of the Giver ; we receive it at the Guru’s Door.

Whatever He Does, happens ; and one acts accordingly. {3/

Chastity, Truth, Continence, are all contained in the Lord’s Name ; -

Without the Name one becomes not Pure.

If it is in one’s Destiny, the Name Comes into one’s mind; and one Attains to the Lord through the
Word,

Nanak : he, who lives Loving" the Lord, his mind in Poise, he’s gifted with the Praise of the Lord,
{4-17-50}

Sri Rag M. 3

He, who subdues his body and stands on the head? to Meditate, but sheds not his Ego,

Finds not the Lord's Name, even if he commits ‘spiritual’ deeds*.

(But) if he Merges his life in the Guru's Word, 2

The Name of the Lord Comes into his heart. /J/ 3

Hear, O my mind, seek the Refuge of the Lord.

(For), one is Saved by the Grace of the Lord, and Crosses the Ocean of Poison through the Guru's 3
Word. {/-Pause] 2)

All are engaged in the three-pronged activity (of the world), and are lost in the Sin of Duality. 3

The Pundit reads, but is attached to Avarice and Realises not the Lord in his love of Maya, Et

When he meets the Guru, his three-fold activity ceases and he finds Release in the Fourth State 5)
(of Bliss). {2} é)

When we find the Way through the Guru, the Darkness of Attachment is dispelled. e)

When we are Merged’ in the Word, we are Saved, and the Door of Deliverance is opened unto us.

And, through the Grace of the Lord, we find Him, yea, He, the Truth, the Creator, the Name. /3/

The mind is so powerful that it leaves no door for our escape :

It keeps us attached to Duality and leaves us to Grieve in Woe,

Nanak : they, who were Devoted to the Lord’s Name, came up, and through the Word their Ego was
stilled, {4-18-51 ]

Sri Rag M, 3

Through His Grace, we find the Guru, and through the Guru is the Name Embedded in our hearts.
Not one has Attained to the Lord without the Guru ; and all have lost their lives in vain.

The self-willed go their own way and are punished at the Lord’s Court. [J]

O my mind, cast thy Doubt away,

That the Lord Comes into thee and thou attain Peace through the Service of the Guru. [Pause]
If one Loves Truth, one Loves the True Word, for the True Word is the speech of Truth.

Let the Name of the Lord Abide in thy mind, that thou shed thy Ego and Anger.

If one Worships the Lord’s Name, one reaches the Door of Salvation. [2] .

The world is lost in “I-amness,” and comes and goes in vain.

The self-willed Realise not the Word and they lose all their Esteem.

We Attain the Name through the Service of the Guru and Merge in (the Lord’s) Truth. /3/

1. geal (act) ; (From Sans. azqq, mouth).

2. df (tft) : (From Sans, aya, meaning love). The word has also been used in its Persian sense to mean
colour, and its other Sanskrit sense to imply joy, sport, etc. ‘

3. Gan sy (ser wa): Urdh is from Sans. get, that which faces upwards; a sapas in which the arms are
slung upwards. Urdit (Qodha) also occurs in the Scripture to mean “downward bent’. This is derived from Sans. way.

4, nifoeraH aom (afro erm) + lit, spiritual deeds ; here, spurious spiritual deeds,

$, Lit, have died.

a oY

§ coweceeoees

Gurv-Granth Sahib 092999999999999299999999999999% 9" "A223 B20 9999
Page 8
SCOSGCOL

Se as

[ 36 ]
If we Believe in the Word, we find the Guru and lose our Ego. ; . P, 34
We Meditate on Him, the True Lord, night and day, and our mind is Attached to Him alune.
When the Treasure of the Lord's Name comes into our mind, Nanak, we Merge in Bliss’. = [4-9-52]
Sri Rag M. 3

Those that Served not their True Guru, they abided in Sorrow through the four ages.

They recognised not the Great Moon in their very homes, for they were lost in Ego.

They, who were cursed by the True Guru, received not the Benediction though they roamed the whole
world through.

They Meditated not on the True Lord which is the Key to all Doors. [JJ

O my mind, recognise the Presence of thy Lord for ever ; He is there before thee.

Thou wilt shed thy woes of birth and death and the Word will fill thy"being. °/-Pause]

They alone are True who Praise the True One and whose Mainstay is the True Name.

They do only what is Holy and Love no one but their True Lord.

The Writ of the True Lord alone runs ; and no one can erase it.

The self-willed do not attain to His Castle ; for they are False and Falsehood cheats them. /2/

The world is engrossed by ‘I-amness’ ; and, without the Guru, stark Darkness fills the world.

We are attached to the Great Illusion and forsake the great Giver, the Dispenser of Peace.

We are Saved only if we Serve the True Lord and abide in Truth.

Through His Grace alone do we find the Lord and Reflect on the True Word, /3]

If one Serves the True Guru, one’s mind becomes Pure and one sheds one’s Ego and Evil.

Leave thou, thy Ego, and find thy life in thy Ego’s death, and Reflect on the Guru's Word.

Thou wilt then attain Peace and will Love the Truth.

They, who are Merged in Truth, their Faces sparkle in the True Court. /4/

They, who accept not the True Guru and Love not the Word,

Their ablutions? and their charities avail them not, (for) they are torn by Doubt.

If the Lord Blesses one with His Mercy, one Loves the Lord’s Name.

Nanak : gather thou then the (Lord's) Name through the infinite Love of the Guru. [5-20-53]

Sri Rag’M. 3

“Whom shall I Serve ?° “What shall I Meditate upon ?”

Ask thy True Guru, (thy God).

Submit to His Will and cast thy self away.

This alone is the Service of the Lord that His Name comes into thee.

From this alone one attains Peace, and through Meditation on the True Word, one looks Beauteous. {J
O my mind, keep thyself Awake night and day, and Reflect on thy Lord.

Protect thy Farm, else the Swallows will eat thy Crop away. /J-Pause]

They, who are filled with the Word, all their Mind's desires are fulfilled.

In the Fear of the Lord, they Love Him, Meditate on Him,

And See the Lord’s Presence before themselves.

With the True Word is their Mind filled, and their life’s Doubt is cast away.

They attain to the Master, the Holiest of the holy, the True, the Treasure of Good?, [2]

Those Who were Awake, were Saved ; those Asleep were Robbed.

For, they Realised not the True Word, and their life passed off like a dream.

Like the guest to a deserted home, one leaves off as one came :

The life of the Egocentric is wasted away ; with what face shall he face the Lord ? [3] P. 35
He, the Lord, is all-in-all ; we say not this for we have Ego.

Through the Guru's Word is He Realised and we cast away our self,

I pay obeisance to those who Serve their True Guru.

Nanak is a Sacrifice unto those who are found True in the Lord’s Court. {4¢-2/-54]

Sri Rag M. 3

What time is the most auspicious for the Lord’s Worship ?

(‘Tis that) when one’s Mind is filled with the Lord's Name, and the True One is acclaimed as True.
When one forgets one's Love even for an instant, what kind is that worship 7 .
He, whose body and mind are comforted with the Lord’s Truth, not one breath of his goes waste, [J]

G SESLOCHSESSESSOSOS

:

1. wots (ear) : fv. equipoise.
2 Lit, bathings.

3. getaste (7Trrgre) : aatg is from Sans. weit, meaning deep.
O my mind, Meditate on the Lord's Name.

For, True Worship is that alone by which the Lord Comes into thee. "/-Pause]

In Poise, if we Cultivate our Farm and Sow the Seed of the True Name,

The Crop is abundant, and the mind is satiated the natural way

The Guru's Word is the Nectar ; quench thy Thirst with it. ‘

Thy Mind then becomes True, for it js Attuned to, and Merges in, Truth. {2

They who see and speak and utter as is testihed by the Word,

Their Word rings through the four Ages, and Truth is what it proclaims.

Their Ege departs and the True One Merges them in Himself.

They live m the Presence of the Lord, being Attuned to God's Truth. /3)

We Meditate on the Lord’s Name if His Grace be upon us; but without True Destiny, no one has found
Him.

He, who js so Destined, gets the Society of the Holy, and receives in his (mind's) arms the True Guru.

His Mind 1s filled with the (Lord's) Name for ever, and the Pain of Evil touches him not.

Hanah é she pond alone Unites us with the Lord, and through the Lord's Name we Merge in Him. a
gad i= D0 f

Sri Rag M. 3

They alone are filled with the Fear of the Lord who Reflect on the Guru's Word,
They Unite with the Society of the Holy, and the Merits of the True one are Revealed to them. . g
They cast off the Dirt of Doubt and wear the Lord in their hearts. ‘
True is their speech, True their mind, and they love no one but the True One, [J] 3
O my mind, thou art smeared with the Dirt of Ego.

The Word of the Lord alone makes thee Pure and Beauteous. //-Pause/ 1
They, who Love the True Word, them the Lord Unites with Himself. . : ;
Their Soul is Merged in the Over-Soul and they are Immersed in the Lord’s Name. ‘
It is through Inner Light that God is Revealed to us and the Light comes from the True Guru.

They, who were so Destined, received the Guru in their arms. /2/ 2
Without the Lord’s Name, all Grieve and are torn by Duality. 2
I live not an instant without Him, and my Night passes in Grief. 4
He, who is cast in Doubt and Darkness, he comes and goes-in vain,

He, on whom is His Grace, him He Unites with Himself. /3]

The Lord Sees of us everything, Hears of us everything ; how can we then deny His Presence ? P. 36
They, who commit Sin upon Sin, are washed away by Sin.

For, they See not their Lord, they are self-willed and Realise not the Lord.

Bul he alone Sees Him on whom is His Pleasure.

Nanak : it is through the Guru that one finds one’s God, /4-23-56/

Sri Rag M. 3

Without the Guru, the Painful Affliction of Ego goes not.

Through His Grace, He fills the Mind with Himself, and one Merges oneself in the Lord’s Name.
Through the Word one Realises the Lord ; without the Word, one loses oneself in Doubt. J]
O my mind, find thy Peace in thy True Self.

And Praise thy Lord that thou comest and goest no more, //-—FPause j

The One alone is the Giver and Operates all over ; no, no one other than Him.

If one Praises the Lord He Abides in the Mind and one attains Peace imperceptibly,

He Sees all, but Gives only to whomsoever He Wills. {2/

In Ego, we are lost in the éount (of our own doings) and guther not Peace.

. We deal in Evil and are Drowned (in the Sea of Maya).

Without the Lord's Name, we find no Rest and suffer Pain in Hell, the domain of the Yama. [3]
The Lord's are the body and life ; He alone is their Mainstay*

If We realise this through the Grace of the Guru, we Attain to the Door of Salvation,

Nanak : Praise thou the Name of the Lord, whose expanse one knows not. {4-24-57 ]

ya eeeyecis

Sri Rag M. 3

é

They alone are in Peace and attain the state of Bliss, who lean on the True Name.
They receive the Truth through the Guru’s Word, and he washes away their Woes,
They recite the Praise of, and Love, the True Name.

He, on whom is His Mercy, gathers the Treasure of Devotion. [J]

GuyrtSumtt Sufi

Page 8

BeeeGeseceesaca

:

[ 38 |

O my mind, Praise Him alone who for ever Abides in Bliss,

Through the True Word, one finds one’s Lord and in Him one Merges. [/-Pause;

With True Worship the mind sparkles bright Red, and is Attuned to the Lord, the natural way.
He, whose mind is bewitched by the Guru's Word, .

His tongue is Imbued with the True Word, and he Drinks the Nectar of the Lord's Praise.
But be alone attains this State on whom His Will it is to shower Grace. [2]

This world is an illusion ; in Sleep the Night passes.

(But), some He Delivers of His Own Will, and Unites them with Himself,

He Comes in the mind, of Himself, and Rids one of the love of Maya,

He\Himself Blesses us with Glory. and this He Makes one Realise through the Guru. = /3/
He, the Lord, is the only Giver ; those. who are in Error, He Corrects,

Some He has Himself made to lose the Way : they are attached to Duality.

And if the Lord is Atlained, one’s Soul Merges in the Over-Soul.

And he, whe Dwells on the One Name for ever, Nanak, Merges init, inthe end, 4-25-54,

Sri Rag M. 3

They, who attained the Lord’s Truth did so through Merit ; they gave up their desire for Evil.
Their minds were Dyed in the Guru's Word, and on their tongue was Love. ;
Without the True Guru, no one feund (the Word): reflect on this in thy mind. P. 37
The Dirt of the self-willed goes not, if they love not the Lord’s Word. [//
O my mind, walk in the Way of the Lord,
To abide in thy real Home, and Drink the Lord’s Nectar to allain Peace. {/-Pawse]
The one without Merit bides not in the Presence of the Lord.
The self-willed know not the Word, and are removed far from the Lord.
They, who Realised the Lord's Truth, their hearts were filled with Truth.
With the Word, they pierced their mind through, and they were Received in the Lord's Presence. /{2/
He Graces us as He Wills, and Unites us with Himself through the Word.
Our True Colour then fades not (from the mind) and we are Attuned to the (Lord's) Truth.
The Man of Ego wanders in all the four directions, but Realises Him not,
Him, whom the True Guru favours, he alone Meets with the Lord and is Merged in the True Word. /3/
I have made friends with many to see if they could end my Woes,
But my Woes were ended (only) on Meeting with the Beloved Lord.
If one has Truth as his Capital, he earns Truth too and True then is his Repute.
Nanak : they, who Realised the Truth, were Separated not from the Lord who is Attained through the
Gum. f4-26-59]
Sri Rag M. 3
The Lord Himself Creates and Himself Sees and Supports all.
He the One alone Pervades ; He the Unknowable.
When He showers His Grace, He Makes us Realise Him and Know Him well.
Through the Guru's Word, He Comes into our minds, and we are Attuned to His Truth, {i}
O man, submit to the Will of the Lord : ;
Thy mind and body will become Cool, and the Lord’s Name will abide in thy Mind. //—Pause]
The Lord, who Created the Universe, of Himself Supports it too.
We Realise Him through the Guru's Word, if He were to Bless us with His Grace.
They alone will look Beauteous in the True Court whom the Lord has United with Himself.
Through the Guru, they have become [mbued with the Love of the True Word. /2/
They Praise the True Word of whose Worth there is no limit.
In their hearts Dwells the Will of the Lord, and on it they Dwell,
Through the Word, they Praise Him and shed their Ego.
The soul without the Lord's Name is without Merit and Grieves. [3]
If I Praise my Lord, and keep myself attached to no one but the True One,
lam satiated with the Lord’s True Name.
I Dwell on Good and I gather Good and all my Evil is washed away.
He it is who Unites us with Himself and then there is no Separation.
Nanak : Praise thy Teacher through whom one Attains to the Lord. 4-27-60)
Sri Rag M. 3
Hear, O Woman’ of lust, why wander you thus about, waving your arms in joy ?
You Realised not thy Lord, with what face then will you face Him ?
They, who knew well their Spouse, I take to their Feet.
Let me be like them ; through the Society of the Holy, | Unite with the Lord. [J] 3 P, 38

1. Woman here stands for the human soul.
O Woman, you have been cheated by Illusion :

The True and Beauleous Spouse is found.by Dwelling on the Guru's Word. /I-Pause]

The self-willed do not Realise their Beloved ; how could they pass their Night (in Union) 7

Filled with Ego and burnt by Desire, they writhe in the Pain of Duality. - .

They who are Imbued with the Word, are the ones Wedded (to their Lord) :

They Enjoy their Spouse eternally and, losing their Ego, they pass their days in Peace. [2]

How can one find one's Love without Wisdom, when one is tom from the Beloved.

She, wha is filled with the Darkness of Ignorance, her Hunger goes not without Seeing the Lord.

Come, my Friends, Unite me with my Lord. :

When our Destiny is Awakened, we meet with the True Guru, and, finding the Truth, we Merge im our
Lord, f3/

Those, on whom is His Grace, such my mates are Wedded to the Lord,

They Realise their Lord, and to Him they offer their body and mind,

They find their Lord in their very Homes, and their Ego departs. 7

Nanak : they are Immersed in the Lord's Praise, day and night, and they gather the Glory of the
Wedded Life, /4-28-6/)

Sri Rag M. 3

Some there are who Enjoy their Spouse, but at whose Door shall I go to ask for my Love ?

Let me Serve my True Guru with Love, and knock at his Door, that he Unites me with the Lord.
The Lord has Created all, and Watches all ; some are near unto Him, while others are afar.

She, who Realises her Lord, Enjoys His Presence. [J]

O Woman, follow the Way of the Guru ;

And Enjoy thy Spouse and Merge imperceptibly in thy God’s Truth. /{J-Pause]

They alone are the True Brides who are Imbued and Decked with the True Word.

In themselves, they find their Lord through the Love of the Guru.

Their Bed is Beauteous ; they Revel in the ecstasy of their Lord's immeasurable Praise, .

He, the Lord, is the Spouse whom I Cherish in my heart.

He who is the Support of all. /2]

Iam a Sacrifice unto those who Praise their Lord. :
I offer my body and mind to them and I take to their Feet : J F
They, who Realised the One and One alone, and shed their Duality,

Nanak, they Realised the Lord’s Name, through the Guru, and they Merged in the Lord's Trath,

[3- 29-62]

Sri Rag M. 3

Thou, O Lord, art the Truest of the true ; all are within Thy Bound!,

Myriads of species are athirst for Thee ; but, without meeting the Holy Guru, they find Thee not.

If He, the Lord Favours and Forgives me, I ‘find Peace in myself ;

And, through the Grace of the Guru, I Serve the True, immeasurable Lord. /I}

G my mind, fill thyself with the Lord's Name and find Happiness.

Through the Word of the Gury, Praise the Lord's Name ; for there is none other than Him. [1-Pause]
The Dharmardja, dispenser of the Lord's Law, has God's instruction to administer the Law.

But his dominion is over those evil souls who are torn by Duality.

The Holy man Meditates in his Mind on the Lord alone, ; .
And him even the Dharmaraja Serves to get Glory. [2/ P. 39
Shed the evils of thy mind, O man, and rid thyself of Ego and Attachment,

And Realise the Over-Soul within thyself, and Merge thyself imperceptibly in the Lord’s Name.

Without the True Guru, the Egocentric finds not Salvation, and wanders about like mad.

He reflects not on the Word, and is engaged in his false prattle, enveloped by Maya, [3/

He, the Lord, alone is ; there is no one other than Him.

I speak as and when He makes me speak.

The Guru's Word is Brahma (the utterer of the Veda), through the Word is one United with the Lord.
Assemble Nanak, the Lord’s Name ; for in the Service of the Name lies thy Peace, [4-30-63]

1, wlg (wt) : (Persian), meaning power, valour, ete.
Guru-Granth Sabib Q999229922999992999992299999999999999932999999090"

BAGESOCCECSOSOSESSSEOESCOSOCEEHOCE

ih

Page 8
[ 40 ]

Sri Rag M. 3

The world is smeared with the dirt of Ego and Duality,

If one goes to wash it off at the holy places, the [mpurity. goes npt.

If one practises the way of works, his Impurity sticks to him even more.

By knowledge alone,the Impurities Jeave one not ; ask thou any man of knowledge. /J/

O my mind, seek the Refuge of the Guru to become Pure.

The Egocentrics repeat the Name of the Lord endlessly, but their Dirt sticks to them. [/-Pause }

The Impure minds devote not to the Word and Receive not the Lord's Name,

Impure they live, Impure they die, and lose Honour as they depart.

If, through the Guru's Grace the Lord Comes into us, our vanity leaves us off.

As the light dispels darkness, so docs the Divine Knowledge dispel Ignorance. /[2/

“T did it, I'l do it,” says the uncouth fool,

But he forgets the (real) Doer, for he's in love with Duality.

Wander one may the whole world through, one finds no Pain greater than that of Maya ;

One finds Peace only in the Guru's Word ; Wear then the Name of the Lord in thy heart (through the
Word). /3/

I am a Sacrifice unto these whom the Lord Unites with Himself.

When the Mind is Imbued with Devotion, through the True Word it finds itself.

In one’s Mind then is the Lord, on his tongue is the Lord, and he sings the Praise of Lord, the God.

Says Nanak, “Forget not the Lord's Name, and Merge thyself in thy God". [{4-3J-64/

Sri Rag M. 4

In my mind is the Pang of Separation from the Lord ; how shall He Come to Meet me in my ‘Home’ ?

When I See my Lord, all my Pain is ended.

I ask my (holy) Mates ; How is the Lord Met with and Received? [JJ

O my True Guru, without Thee, I Jean on no one, :

J am an Ignorant Wretch ; I seek Thy Refuge ; Take pity on me and Unite me with Thyself. //-Pause/

Through the True Guru comes the Lord's Name and it is through the Grace of the Lord that one Meets

with the Guru.

The True Guru has Realised the Lord : so no one equals the Guru.

I seek Refuge in the Guru's Sanctuary, and by His Grace, He Unites me with the Lord. {2}

By forcing the mind!, one finds not the Lord : many have thiswise struggled in vain. P, 40

They tried a thousand clever tricks, but their Raw mind? did not accept the Colour of the Lord,

Through Falsehood and Deceit, one Attains not the Lord, for one eats what-one sows. [{3/

My Lord, Thou art the Hope of all ; Thine is the Treasure they have.

From Thy Door no one returns empty ; they, who.come through the Guru, get Applause at Thy Court.

We are being Drowned in the Sea of Vice, Nanak prays Thee :

“Save me, O Save me, my Lord”. /4-J-65/

Sri Rag M. 4

When I Meet my Lord, my Mind is satiated ; without the Lord's Name, cursed is one’s life.

If I meet with a Holy Mate, T ask him to Reveal to me the Lord, the Treasure of Virtuc.

I am a Sacrifice every bit unto him who lights in me the Light of the Lord’s Name. /J//

O my Love, I live by Thy Name.

Without Thy Name, life is of no avail: OQ my True Guru, Reveal to me the Secret of Thy Name,
[i-Pause]

Thy Name is the priceless Jewel that the Perfect Guru has,

If one dedicates oneself to the Service of the True Guru, he lights in one’s heart the Light of Wisdora

and the Lord’s Name is then Revealed.
Blessed is the fortunate one who goes to Meet his Guru! /2/
They, who did not Meet their Spouse, the Guru, they, the Unfortunate ones, become -the playthings of
imeé.

They take the Round ; they are as dreadful worms licking dirt.

Touch them not*. for they abide with Anger, the Chandél, [3]

The Guru is the Pool of Nectar ; the Fortunate ones Bathe in it.

The Dirt of all their births is washed off, and they Dwell on the Lord's Immaculate Name.

Nanak is in the Supreme State (of Bliss), for he is Attuned to the Guru-God. [4-2-66]

1. Heats (nagfs) : fir. by forcing (afs) the mind (1), a8 the Harh-Yogi does.

2. a9 dq s Ste (mit tq 7 AE) : fe. As colour does not stick (4 dfe) to the raw, uncultured (39) cloth. The
implication is that unless the mind is disciplined, it cannot suck-in the essence of Truth.

3. wert a facia (garfa a fret) : /e., meet them not (frebi, from Sans. wz) again (erin, from Sans. fem).
[41 ]

Sri Rag M. 4

I sing the Praises of the Lord : His Praises | Dwell upon’ ;

J speak of them alone,
The Holy ones are merciful ; Associating with them, one sings the Praises of the Lord.

The (Guru-)Diamond has piereed through the ‘diamond’ (of my mind) and I Bathe in the glorious red
of the Lalla flower. [J]

O Thou Support of the earth, when I sing Thy Praises, my mind is satiated. ;
When one is athirst for the Lord's Name, the Guru is Merciful and Unites him with the Lord, {I-Pause]

O my fortunate mates, Dye your minds in His Colour ; the Guru is Pleased (with ye) in His Mercy.
The Guru has Revealed the Name to my mind with Love ; O, | am a Sacrifice unto Him.

Without the True Guru,one finds not the Lord's Name, even if one does a million acts (of piety). [2]
Without Destiny. we find not the Guru, even though We sit daily near unto him in his temple.

For in us is the Darkness of Ignorance and Doubt, and this sereen us off from Him,

One becomes not Gold withoul the True Guru.

One is heavy at heart, like iron, and as one takes not the Refuge of the Boat, one is Sunk. [3]

The True Guru's Boat is the Lord's Name, but how to Board it, O dear ?

He, who walks in the Way of His Will, finds himself Ferried across.

Nanak : fortunate is he whom the Guru Unites with the Lord. {4-3-67/

Sri Rag M, 4

€
(4)
4
E}
)
ed
a
fy
a
-
e)
a
a
I stand on the Wayside ever and ask the Wayfarers : “Pray tell me the Way to my Lord”. P, 41 2
I follow the footsteps of those who have Enjoyed the Love of my God.
I beseech them, pray to them. “Dears, I seek to Meet my Love.” [i/ 3
O my brothers, take me to my Master; :
Sacrifice am I unto my True Guru who Revealed my Lerd to me. fi-Pense/
Tn utter humility, I fall at the Door of the Perfeet Guru.
He honours the humble ane strokes their backs.
I tire not. from Praising my Guru who Unites me with the Lord. [2,
Everyone in the world is athirst for the Guru,
But without Destiny, He meets one not, and one grieves. 3
All Uhat is in God's Will shall come to pass : the Writ of Eternity no one can erase. /3] 4)
He: is the Guru, He the Lord ; He, of Himself, Unites thee with Himself.
Through His Grace,He Unites thee with Himself and Takes thee to the Guru.
He is the world, He the Supporter of the world ; when He, Nanak, Unites another with Himself it is like
the (river-)water flowing into the waters (of the sea). [4-4-68/
Sri Rag M. 4
The Taste of the Lord’s Name is like Nectar ; but how shall I Taste it ?
Let me ask the (Lord's) Brides, “How did ye come across your Spouse 7”
They, the care-free ones, speak not their minds out : 1 Wash their Feet (to earn their Pleasure). [J]
O brother, meet with thy Friend and Dwell on the Merits of the Lord.
Thy Friend, thy Spouse, is the True Guru, who rids thy mind of Ego. {J-Pause]
The God-wards Enjoy the Nuptial Love ; their heart is full of Compassion,
The Word of the True Guru is the Jewel ; he, who accepts its validity, Tastes the Essence of the Lord,
They are the men of Destiny, Beloved of Him, who Tasted the Essence of the Lord, through the Grace
of the Guru, 2)
The Essence of the Lord pervades the whole universe ; but those without Destiny Taste it not,
Without the True Guru, nothing avails ; the self-willed wail in vain.
They bow not before the Guru, for in their hearts is the goblin of Anger. {3]
He, the Lord, is the Essence, He the Name.
He, in His Grace, Gives, and, through the Guru, one Receives the Nectar of the Name.
ie Pace ae Nanak, “one’s body and mind are in Bloom, and into one Comes the Lord of Love”.
Sri Rag M. 4
a
|
*)
=)
gq

The day rises and then it dies into the night and then the night passes.
The age* thus wears off. but the man knows not that the mouse (of Time) is rearing at the Rope (of life),

He is attached like a fly to the sweet of Maya, and thus wastes his life away,

|. faraar (famcr) ; (Sans. farat), detailed description.

2. siz (at) : (Sans. arga), age.
3. ws wee (94 Tare) : (Sans. 14), meaning cooking, also fire. As verb, it means to digen:, ‘-ace to waste

away. ; Z
Goru-Gra nth Sahib 999999992999999999999909999999999999922999990090%

g

Page 9
[ 42 ]

O brother, thy Lord is thy only Friend ;

Thy attachment to thy wife! and thy sons is false : for they keep not thy company in the end. /J-Pawse]

Through the Guru's Word, one Dwells on the Lord and is Emancipated : P. 4Z

They, who sought their Refuge in the Lord, Maya contaminated them not.

They kept death always before their eyes and equipped themselves with the Lord's Name; and so they
received Honour,

They were Robed in the Lord's Court and the Lord took them in His Embrace. /2/

They, who walk in His Way which they know well, for them there is no obstacle on the Way to His Door,

They Praise the Lord's Name, Believe in it, and are attached Lo it eternally,

They are Blest at the Lord's True Court with Honour, and the Unstruck Music rings (to Receive them)
at the Lord's. Gate. /3/

They, who Praise the Lord's Name, them everyone blesses,

Bless me With their company, O Lord : this is the prayer of Thy seeker.

Says Nanuk, ‘Fortune smiles on them to whom the Light of the Word is Revealed”, /4-73-3/-6-70)

Sri Rag M. 5

Why, O why, are you mad after your son and your bedecked wife ?

You enjoy pleasures of many many sorts, and are in ecstasy.

You give command and act in a haughty way.

(But) you remember not the Creator, O you self-deceived purblind fool! /1/

O my mind, the Lord is the only Giver of Peace.

One finds the Lord through the Guru's Grace ; the Guru is met with if it be in one’s Destiny. // -Pause]
One is bedecked with fine clothes, but knows not that all one’s gold and silver are as dust.

One keeps good horses and elephants® and rides about in his ‘untiring’® carriages ;

And remembers nought else and forgets even his near ones :

One Dwells not on the Creator ; but without the Lord’s Name, all his possessions are unholy. /2/

As one gathers wealth, one is accursed.

For one satisfies those who, like him remain not.

He is proud and is engaged as his will engages him. :

He goes the wrong way, for such is the Lord’s Will, and so has neither Recognition nor Honour. /3/
Ihave Met my only Lord, the Purwsha, through the True Guru,

He, the one, is our (only) Support ; why then one cries out, stung by Ego ?

That what the God's man wishes, that alone God does ; and such a one no one can turn from His Door,
Nanak : he who is [mbued with the Essence of the Lord, his Light Pervades the whole universe,

(4-1-7 1]
Sri Rag M. 5
If a man’s mind is engrossed in pleasures and he enjoys in many ways and has revelries that stagger the
sight ;

If he rules over the world and the canopy waves over his head—all this throws one in Doubt. {JJ

O brother, one gathers Peace only in the Society of the Holy.

He, who Wrote thy Destiny, the Person, who Created thee, if He so Wills, thy Doubt is cast away.
{l-Patuse]

I have wandered through all the places.

The rich, the owners of vast spaces, wasted their life wailing, “this is mine, this is mine", [2/

They gave command without Fear, and acted in Ego,

They subdued all, but without the Lord’s Name,they too returned to dust. /3/

Even if one has command over thirty-three crores’ of angels, and the miracle-men and ascetics stand at

is door,

If he is a man of such as high station® and vast dominions, these too become in the end but a dream.

f4-2-72}
Sri Rag M. 5

Each day we bedeck our bodies ; but without the knowledge of the Real, we are as ignorant stones. P, 43
He, who Remembers not the Lord, his body shall be cast to the wastes®,
(But), he who Dwells on the Lord, enjoys Bliss for ever, [i]

|. aaa (wag) : “(Sans. waa), ‘wife. f

dea dea (fet frre) : from Sans ga, horse ; wt, beautiful ; 7a, elephant.
ni-ara (aT-qTR) : untiring.

A crore is equal to ten million.

fagadl (fréaré) : (Persian fgtq'g]), state of affluence.

gale (aarfer).: (Persian ghrars), forest,

aie eh

O man, you came here to carn merit,

But how vainly are you engaged, while the Night of life passes away. [/-—Pause,/

The animals and the birds revel and play', for they see not death,

Like them is also the man who is ensnared by Maya.

They alone are the Saved ones who Contemplate the Lord's True Name. [2]

The home that one has to abandon, one loves,

And where he has to go and be, for that he cares not!

They, who took to the Feet of the Guru, were Released from Maya's Snare. [3]

No one can Save thee without the Guru ; no one else is there for thee to seek. ;

I have searched the four corners of the world and have sought Thy Refuge, O Lord, in the end, :
Suys Nanak, “The True King, my God, has Saved me while I was being Drowned in the sea (of Material

Existence)”. /4-3-73/
Sri Rag M. 5 F

The man was a guest for a brief moment to this earth to fulfil his Destined end :

But he was lost in Maya and lust and Realised not his Destiny. : .

Repentance came to him when he left the world, and he was delivered unto the Yarma*.  [1) é)

The Blind one sits on the (treacherous) bank of the River (and may soon be washed away). O

If only it be in his Destiny, he shal] Dwell on the Guru's Word. [J-Pause] =

Onc knows net, if the Crop (of life) shall be reaped only when ripe, half-ripe® or tender. 8

(The Angel of Death) reaches with his Scythe and Croppers. ; 2

When the Muster Gives the Word, they Reap the Farm and measure the Grain’, [2]

One’s first ‘watch’ of the Night (of life) passes in fruitless work, the second ‘watch’ in deep sleep ;

In the third ‘watch’ one wastes oneself away (in Sin) and in the fourth ‘watch’, the day (of death)

breaks.

One Remembers not the One who Gave him body and life. {3; 3

1 am a Sacrifice from my soul unto the Society of the saints ¢
i]
&)
é)
ef
é)
e)
é)
Ee)
&)
e)
)
é)
a
A)
@)
A)
&
J

Who made me Realise (the Self) and United me with my Wise Lord, ;
And, I saw Him always in my company, yea, He who Knows the inmost Essence (of things). [4-4-74]

Sri Rag M.5

Let me forsake everything but not my Lord.

The Guru has delivered me of all my embroilments and made me Taste the Lord's True Name.

O man, give up all thy hopes, and lean only on the one Hope (of thy Lord). [J]

They, who Served the True Guru got a Place in the Yonder world. [J/

Praise, O my mind, the Creator,

Give up all thy cleverness and fall at the Feet of the Guru. //-Pause]

One suffers neither Pain nor Hunger, if the Giver of Peace Comes into his mind.

One loses in nothing when the True One Abides in the heart.

He, O Lord, whom Thou Givest Thy Hand, him no one can vanquish.

Praise, Praise, be to the Lord, the Giver of Peace, who rids us of all our Sins. [2

Thy Servant, O Lord, seeks to Serve those who are Blest with Thy Service.

We get the companionship of the Holy and Serve them if the Lord’s Grace be upon us. P. 44
For everything is in the Hands of the Master, and He, of Himself, Does everything.

1 am a Sacrifice unto the True Lord who Fulfils all my hopes. [3]

One and One alone, is our Friend, Brother and Life-mate :

To Him belong all the elements and He is the Dispenser of the Law.

When thy mind is Imbued with the One alone, it attains Peace ;

Thy eatings then become sacred, O Nanak, so also thy wears, for thou then hast the support only of

(the Lord's) Truth. /4-5-75/

Sri Rag M. §

I receive all the Joys (of life), if Him I Receive.
And my life, His precious Gift, becomes Blessed if 1 Recite the True Word.
He, who is so destined, Enters the Lord's Castle, through the Guru's Grace. [J]

CECH ENS

!. gen (Fe) =z, to play.

"2. erg (starz) : (Persian, fers), wild (Yama). . ;
3. agal (weit) : half-ripe. a
4. ofa fife darg (gfe faftrar errs) : cutting (gfe) the crop (ag), they measured it (fifznr),

#

Hasgoeeeceees

a
d
g
gE
¥
F
©
|
S
Gy]

Pcl
-

Page 92 www.sikhbookelub.com
SEOOeGa

xe

cy

}) OONDOOOOCHSOSOOSOOS

| 44 ]

Mind thou, O my mind, the One and One alone.
Without Him all else is waste, illusion, Maya and false love. {1-Pause]
One enjoys myriads of joys, nay one is a king, if the Lord’s Grace be upon him.
If He Blesses with His Name even for an instant, our mind and body become Cool,
They who were so Destined, Embraced the Feet of the Lord. /2/
That time, that hour, is Blessed when one Loves one’s Lord.
He suffers not Pain nor Woe, whose Support is the Lord's Name.
Him the Guru Saves and he Swims across (the Sea of Material Existence). [3
That place-is Blessed, where the Saints gather.
He alone gets an Anchor who (is Met with: by) the True Guru.
And so, Nanak, he builds his ‘home’ on firm ground, where there is no ageing, no birth and no death.
[4-6-76]
Sri Rag M. 5

Dwell on Him alone, O my mind, who is the King of kings.

Rest thy hope on Him alone who is the Hope of all.

Shed all thy cleverness and take to the Feet of the Guru. [J]

Meditate, O my mind, on the Lord's Name, in Peace and Joy.

Day and night call on thy God and utter His Praises for ever, /J-Pause]

Seek His Refuge, O my mind, whom no one can equal ;

Meditating on whom one gathers Peace, and Pain and Woe touch one not .

So, Serve thou thy Lord, thy True Master, ever and for evermore. 2]

If we join the Society of the Holy, we become Pure, and the Noose of the Fama ts loosed.
Pray to thy Lord, the Giver of Joy, therefore: He is the Destroyer of fear.

On whomsoever Gad Looks with Mercy, all his deeds come right. /3/

For, He is the Greatest of the great ; His Place is the Highest of the high.

He is beyond colour, beyond sign, beyond value.

Have Mercy on Nanak, O Lord, and Bless him with Thy True Name. [4-7-77]

Sri Rag M. 5

He, who Meditates on the Lord's Name, is in Peace ; his Face Sparkles.

(When) one Receives the Lord’s Name from the Perfect Guru, one is Acclaimed the world over.
The Lord Resides in the Society of the Saints, yea, He the One, the True. [JJ

Contemplate, O my mind, the Lord’s Name.

For, the Lord’s Name keeps thee constant company and Saves thee Hereafter. [J-Pause] P, 45
of what avail is the world’s glory ?

The colour of Maya fades away in the end.

He, in whose heart is the Lord, is the Perfect one, the First among men. [2]

Be thou the Dust of the Saint's Feet and shed thy Ego.

Shed all thy cleverness, thy tricks and take to the Feet of the Guru,

(But) he alone Receives this Jewel in whose Lot it is so Writ, {3

And upon whom the Lord bestows it, of Himself.

He alone Serves the True Guru, who is rid of the Affliction of Ego.

Nanak has Met with the Guru, and so all his Afflictions are past. [4-8-78/

Sri Rag M. 5

He, thy God, is the Knower of thy Self; He is the One who Saves :

He is the mind’s Support, He the Mainstay of life.

In His Refuge is All-Peace ; He is the Creator, thy Transcendent Lord. [i]

Shed all other cfforts, O my mind,

And call each day on the Perfect Guru, Attuning thy mind to the One alone. [J-Pause]
He, the One. is the Brother ; He the Father and the Mother,

He alone is our Refuge, who Gave us the body and the soul.

Forget not the Lord, therefore, who Holds all in His Hands. [2]

He is in thy very Home ; He alone is Infinite and beyond all places ;

He is the Creator of all ; so call on Him might and day.

If one is Imbued with the One, one Grieves not. [3]

The Lord is the One alone : who else is there to seek ? .

His are the body and the Soul ; that what happens is in His Will.

Contemplating the True One, through the Perfect Guru, O Nanak, one becomes Perfect too, {4-9-79/

Gaon Gonnth Suli
Sri Rag M.5

They, who call on the True Guru, are the Perfect ones.

They, on whom is His Grace, in their mind flowers Wisdom,
They, in whose Lot it is so Writ, Receive the Lord’s Name. [J]
Meditate on the One Name, O my mind,

That thou art Blest with Equipoise and Robed with Honour at the Lord’s Court. {1-Pause]

Man loses the fear of birth and death in the Love of the Lord,

And becomes Pure in the Society of the Guru ; him the Lord Sustains ; d
The Dirt of his life is washed off and he is Saved by the Sight of the Guru. [2] =! ed
He Pervades all places, the space, the inter-space, He, the One Lord. ~
He is the Giver ; none else can be ; nay, none.

One is Saved in His Sanctuary, for that what He Wills, happens. /3/

He, in whose mind is the Perfect Lord, is the Perfect one, the First among men.

Pure is his Repute and he is Acclaimed the world over.

Nanak is a Sacrifice unto him who Meditates upon the Lord, [4-/0-80]

Sri Rag M. 5

Meeting Pa the True Guru, all my Afflictions are over and the Lord’s Joy has come inte my
Min s

My Mind is IIlumined ; 1 Call on no one but Him,

On Meeting the Saints, my Face becomes Holy and | receive what is Writ im my Lot.

And [ sing ever the Praise of the Lord, through the True and Pure Word. [7]

O my Mind, one is Blest with Peace through the Guru's Word.

He, who is in the Service of the Perfect Guru, fulfils himself. “J-Pause

The mind’s desires are fulfilled when one finds the Treasure of the Lord’s Name.

He is the Knower of thy inner Self, thy Companion ; 50 ever Realise thy Creator. . .

By the Guru's Grace, if one Meditates on the Lord's Name and gives away all he has in charity—that,
indeed, is the Holy Bath.

His Lust, Anger and Avarice depart, so also his Ego. /2/

And he reaps the Profit of the Lord's Name and is fulfilled.

He, by His Grace, Unites us with Himself and Grants us the Glory of His Name.

Our comings and goings then cease and His Mercy is upon ws.

One Attains to the True Home by Realising the Guru's Word. [3]

He Protects His Devotees by His Grace, ;

Their faces are Pure, both here and Hereafter’ ; for they Dwell on the Truth of the True One.

They are Imbued with His immense Love ; and. remember the Good of the True Lord.

Says Nanak, “The Lord is the Ocean of Peace and I am a Sacrifice unto Him.” [4-1]-81]

Sri Rag M.5

If we meet with the Perfect Guru, we Receive the Treasure of the Lord’s Name.
And, through the Lord’s Grace, upon it we Dwell. ay,
The pain of birth and death ceases and our mind is fixed upon Him, in Equipoise. [ 1/ a
O my mind, seck the Refuge of thy Lord.
(For), Without Him there is no one else ; Call thou on Him alone. //-Pause]
How can one value Him—the vast, deep Ocean of Good.
Go, thou, O Fortunate one, to the Holy Congregation, and put trust in the True Word.
And Serve the Ocean of Peace, the King of kings.  /2/
I have the Support of the Lotus-Feet of the Lord : nought else is my Support.
I lean on Thee, my God ; I live, for Thou art at my back.
Thou art the pride of the lowly : I seek to Merge in Thee, /3/
Night and day J Call on Him, the Supporter of the earth.
Yea, He who in His Mercy Saves our body, life, riches and Soul ; for the Lord in His Mercy 15 for ever
Forgiving. {4-12-82}
Sri Rag M. 5

1 Love the True One, who is neither born, nor dies,

Who's separated never from me and Pervades all,

Who Cures the Affliction of the meek and Greets them with Honour’,

Wondrous is the Form of the Formless One ; O mother, I Met Him through the Guru. [Jj

|. gala uefa (gate qafa) : (Sans. qaeaa:), here and there,
2. waafe (svar) = (Fe we aH): with good will.

RTI CR

g
B
e
E
¥
=
$ 3
g
|
g

Page 9
O brother, make thy Lord thy Friend.

Cursed is the love of Maya, with il not one is joyed. {/-Pause]

He alone ts Wise. Beneficent, of Tender Heart, ef Pure Form, and Vast,

Thy Friend, the Protector, Highest of the high,

He is neither young nor old ; His Court is Eternal.

We gather from Him what we seck : He is the Shelter of the shelterless. [2°

Secing Him, our Sins depart and our body and mind rest in Peace.

Remember Him, the One alone, with a single mind, and cast thy Doubts’ away.

He, who is the Treasure of Good, the Ever-fresh Being, whose Gift is perfect,

Call on Him for ever, night and day. [3/

He, in whose Lot it is so Writ, his Friend is the Lord.

I make an offering to Him of my body, mind and Soul.

He forever Sees all, Listens to all and Pervades all hearts.

He even Sustains the ungrateful wretches. (for) He, Nanak, is the most Beneficient Lord of Mercy.
4-13-83)

Sri Rag M. 5

The Lord, who Gave us mind, body and the riches and has Bedecked us the natural way*,
And has Blest us with all power and has [lumined us from within with His Infinite Light’,
Remember thou Him for ever and keep His Company in thy mind. /J7/

O my mind, there is no one other than thy Lord,

Seek ever the Refuge of thy Lord that thou art no more in Sorrow. = / /-Pausej

Thy precious stones, thy pearls, gold and Silver are as dust :

Thy mother, father, sons and kins, aré all falsely related to thee.

Why then Remember not thy Creator, O selfish, impious quadruped ? /2/

He, who Pervades thy inside, and is all over, Him thou considerest far !

Thou cravest to fulfil thy desires, and within thee are Ego and Falsehood.

Without Worship of the Lord’s Name, one comes and goes, like the crowd, in vain. [3]
Save Thou them all, my Lord, in Thy Mercy.

For, without Thee, there is no one to Protect them from the Tyranny of the Fama.

Let Nanak not forsake Thy Name ; have Thy Mercy on him, QO Lord! [4-/4-&4/

Sri Rag M. 5

I may have a beauteous body and riches and dominion over lands,

And have sons and wife and many mistresses, and I may revel in a myriad ways,

But if I Remember not the Lord’s Name, they are all in vain. [J/

O my mind, Meditate on God's Name.

And, associating with the Saints, Attune thy mind to the Feet of the Guru. //-Pause/

I gather the Treasure of the Lord's Name if it be in my Destiny.

Then alone I am fulfilled and T hug the Feet of the Guru.

The ague of Ego goes, and cease my comings and goings’. {2

Keep thou the Society of the Saints ; in the Lord’s Name is the merit of pilgrimage to the holies sixty-

eight.
Thy soul and body and mind flower ; this is the true end of thy life.
Thou art blest with Glory here and findest a Place in the Lord’s Court. {3/ oP. 48

Thy Lord Does everything : everything is in His Hands.
He, the One, Gives life to the dead ; and is with thee within and without. at
Nanak seeks the Refuge of the Lord, the God, who is the Master of every heart, /4-.2°95]

Sri Rag M. 5

Iseck the Refuge of my Lord by the Guru's Grace,
Through the Instruction of the Guru, all my involvement is past.
The Lord’s Name has stuck in my mind and His Ambrosial Sight has Saved me. [J]

1. gaz (wratfir) : (Sans. scifi), wanderings ; doubt,

2. afer afoa Aevfa (<Paar afar acts) : bedecked ihe natural way.

3. af mura (off aurc) : ie. the soul which has emanated from the Supreme Being, hence infinite.
4. ara (ary) : (from ary, ta go) is inflected thus due to exigency of rhyme. *

oe ee

19992300 Guru-Granth Sahib
0 my mind, take to the Service of the True Guru,

That the Lord bestows Mercy upon thee and thou forgettest Him not even fora moment. {Pause}

Praise thou thy Lord that thy Sins are eradicated.

Without the Name, we find no Peace ; T found it not in the manifold activity of life.

He, who single-mindedly Praises Him, the Lord, he Swims across the Sea of Existence. /2/

The merits of pilgrimage, fusting and a myriad disciplines of the senses, one finds in the Dust of the
Saint's Feet,

From whom does one hide one’s shame? For He, the Lord, Sees it all in His Presence,

He Fills all places, the space and the inter-space. /3/

True is His Kingdom, True is His Command, True is His Seat,

True is the Nature which He Created, True the world He built.

Repeat thou, Nanak, then the True Name : and be a Sacrifice unto thy Lord. /4-/6-86]

Sri Rag M, 5

Make an effort to Dedicate thyself to thy Lord + earn, O thou Fortunate one, the Lord’s Name.

In the Society of the Holy, Call thou on thy Lord and the Dirt of all thy births is washed away. {i}
O my mind, Meditate on God's Name:

And, gather the Fruit of thy heart's desire and let thy Sickness and Sorrow depart. / Pause]

See thou the Lord ever with thee, to seck whom thou camest into being :

Yea He, who Fills and Sanctifies the water, the earth and the space with His Grace. 2]

Our body and mind become Pure if we Love the Lord's Truth.

He, who Serves the Feet of the Lord, he alone has Meditated truly and practised true Austerities, /3/
The Lord's Name is the Nectar, the Jewel, the Ruby and the Pearl,

Get thy Peace, Nanak, in His Bliss, by singing the Praises of thy Lord, /{4-77-87]

tl

Sri Rag M. 5

This is the Essence of the Shasrras, this the only good omen! : repeat thou the Lord’s Name,

The Guru Blesses thee with the Wealth of his Lotus-2 -Feet ; and the shelterless from him attain a Shelter,
This is one's True Capital-stock ; this the True Discipline, ‘that one sings the Lord’s Praises day and night.
By His Grace is the Lord Met and our in-comings into the world of Desire cease, [J]

O my mind, Meditate on the Lord with thy whole mind :

Yea, He, who Fills all hearts and ever Keeps thee company. [/-Pawse]

I cannot measure my Ecstasy when I Call on the Lord.

He, who Tasted God, was sated ; he alone Knows the Taste. P. 49
In the Society of the Saints the Lord Comes into our minds’:

Yea, He the Beloved, the Forgiving God.

He, ‘who Dwelt on his Lord is the king of kings. /2/

The time, when one says the Praises of the Lord, brings the merit of a myriad ablutions.

If the meritorious tongue ullers the Lord's Praise, it is the greatest boon.

By His Grace, the Lord Comes into thy body and mind, yea, He the Merciful, the Beneficent One,

His are my body and Soul—I am for ever a Sacrifice unto Him, /3,

He is Separated by no one whom the Lord Unites with Himself,

The True Creator Cuts off the Fetters of His Servants :

And them, who have strayed away from Him, He Shows the Path, Viewing not their merit, demerit.
Nanak seeks the Refuge of Him, who is the Support of all hearts. {4—J8-88]

Sri Rag M. 5

Repeat thou the True Name with thy tongue that thy body and mind become Pure.
thy mother, father and all thy many kins, not one avails without Him.

If the Lord Takes Pity, one forsakes Him not even for an instant, [J}

O my mind, Serve thou the True One till thou hast life ;

For withowt the True One, all else will vanish away in the end. /{7-Pause]

My Master is the Pure One, without Him one lives not.

In me is a strong urge (to See Him), would some one, O my mother, make me See Him ?

I have searched the four corners of the earth ; without His, there is no place to go to. /2/

1, aGe (aay) —(Sans. wea :), an auspicious omen.

POEIOSOCE ECOSCEAGSSOSC SCOCHCSAGSOSECCESEAE CSL BEHCOCOSCECOGE

Guru-Granth Sahib 999999999999999999999999999999999909808999990090"
Page 96 
[ 48 ]

I pray to the Guru that He Unites me with the Lord.

The True Guru is the Dispenser of the (Lord's) Name; His Treasure: is Brimful.
Praise thou Him always whose Expanse one cannot measure. /3,

Let us Praise our Sustainer ; Wondrous and Manifold is His Play.

Call on Him—this alone is True Wisdom,

Nanak : the Lord seems sweet to Him in whose Lot it isso Writ, [4-19-89

Sri Rag M. 5

© brothers, meet ye the Lord’s Saints and from them gather the Name of the Lord.

Gather ye for the Journey the Food which goes with ye in the Yond.

Ye Attain to Him through the True Guru, and He Saves ye with His Grace.

His Grace it is that Unites ye with Him—and on him is the Grace on whom is His Pleasure. (J
O my mind, there is no one to equal thy Lord.

I know nat of another : it is the Guru that Unites thee with the True One. //-Pause}

He gathers all the things he seeks who goes to Sec the Guru,

He is the Fortunate one whose mind is set on the Guru’s Feet.

The Guru ts all-Powerful, all-Mercy. and He Pervades all :

For He is the God, our Transcendent Lord, who Saves the Drowning creatures. [2]

How shall we Praise the Guru, the All-powerful Cause of causes! ?

Constant is the Star of his Destiny on whose Forehead is the Guru's Hand.

The Guru brings to us the Nectar-Name and gives us Release from our births and deaths.

He, who Serves the Guru and the God, his Fear and Pain are dispelled. /3/

The Truc Guru is the deep and vast Ocean of Peace, the Destroyer of Sin. P. 50
He, who Serves the Guru, for him there is no Punishment of the Fama,

No one equals the Guru : I have searched the whole world through.

Says Nanak : “The True Guru has given mé the Treasure of the Lord's Name, and my mind is filled
with® Gladness”, [4-20-90]

Sri Rag M. 5

That what seemed sweet turned out to be sour in taste :
The brothers and bosom-friends turned out to be a vain illusion in the end.

For nothing stays* : and without the Lord’s Wondrous Name, the unreal seems as realt. [J
O my mind, yoke thy self to the Service of the True Guru :

All that seems will pass away—follow then not thy mind’s lead. /{/—Pausej

Like the mad dog, thy mind wanders in all directions,

The avaricious know not and cat even the uneatable.

They are in the grip of Lust, Anger and Ego and are cast eternally into the womb, [2]
Maya has cast its Net wide and in it is the Bait,

The Bird of Desire walks into it and can find no Release.

He who forgets the Creator, comes and goes for ever, /3/

The world is enticed away in a myriad ways (by Maya},

And he alone ts Saved whom the Almighty Lord Protects.

The Servants of God are Saved by Calling on their Lord-; Nanak is a Sacrifice unto them, /4-2/-9/ 7

Sri Rag M. 5

Like a herdsman one comes to the Pasture-land’ : In vain one seeks to stay long.

For, when one’s time is over, one has to leave ; assemble then thy goods, O dear! , J//
Sing thou the Praises of the Lord and Serve the Guru with Love.

Why art thou proud of the little vanities of life? {/-Pause/

Like the night guest, one must depart in the morn.

Why then art thou enticed away by thy household ? Thy pleasure-garden will not stay for ever. [2/
1. gee age (aon ere) : the cause (ase) of causes (a1g=),
2. Hz (Hg): (Sans. Arey), “> bedeck, ir. to wear.
3. far (faerz) : (Sans. fasta), delay.

4. fea ave faaare (fay aa? rang, : 4. without the Name, everything looks so mysterious (that is, divorced
from reality).
Why thou sayest : "tis mine, mine’ ? Seek thou Him who Gave thee life.
Forsure thou shalt leave behind all they millions. --/3/

Thou wandered through myriads of births to get a man's precious vestute ;
Nanak : remember thou then the Lord's Name ; for the day of death is near at hand, {4-22-92) \

Sri Rag M. §

O my body, you live only till there's life m you,

When life departs, you return to the dust. /J/

My mind craves longingly? to See Thee, my Lord,

Blessed, Blessed, is Thy (eternal) Place. /J-Panse/

O Bride, when the Groom? is with you, all give you honour, ~

But when He Departs, then no one cares for you, [2/

In your Parents’ home, you are blest as at your In-laws’,

And, if you learn the right Way, you are never in Pain. /3]

All will go one day to the In-laws; all will be given away in Marriage®.

‘So, blessed is the Bride, Nanak, who loves her (ever-lasting) Spouse, {4-23-93 P. 51

Sri Rag M. 5

He alone is the Creator who Created all forms,

Meditate then on Him who is the Support ofall, //!

Meditate in thy mind on the Guru's Feet.

Shed all thy cleverness and Attune thyself to the True Word. [J-Pause]

One gets not Pain if the Guru’s Word bein one’s heart :

Millions have tried ; without the Guru not one was Saved. /2/

In His Sight, the mind gets all the Support it needs, and all our Sins hasten away,

Iam a Sacrifice unto them who take to the Guru's Feet. /3/

In the Sanctuary of the Saints, the True Name of the Lord comes into the mind.
Fortunate are they, Nanak, who Cherish the Love of the Lord in their hearts, {4-24-94]

Sri Rag M. 5

Gather thou the Wealth of the Lord's Name ; Worship the True Guru and shed thy Sins.
Remember Him who Created thee and thou shalt be Saved, [//
Meditate, O my mind, on the One Great Name

Who Gave thee body, mind and Soul, and is the Support of thy heart. /J-Pause] :
The world is enticed away by Lust, Anger and Ego ; uy
Seek thou the Feet of the Saints to shed the Darkness of Pain. [2] iB

Holy is the practice of Truth, Contentment and Comnassion : “ hier
(But), he alone gives up his Ego and becomes like the Dust for all on whom is the Mercy of the Lord. [3)

All that seems is filled with His Light. .
The Lord has Dispelled the Doubt of Nanak and he Sees Him and Him alone, all over., (4-25,95]

Sri Rag M. 5 og a
The world is engrossed in seeking the merit of deeds, good and bad*. “his
Above both is the Devotee of the Lord ; but one knows him not, /J/ aha
The Lord Pervades all. "oe
What shall I say ; hear Thou, my Master, Thou art the Great All-wise. {/-Pause] Lal aula
“peteaial a

Thy True Servant cares not for honour, dishonour.
The Seer of the Essence®, © Saints, is rare-—one among millions, who looks upon all alike /{2/

Many but talk about Him and consider this to be the Way ot the Lord’s Praise,
But rare indeed is the God-man, who seeks Him above speech. /3/ 7

Nanak has received Benediction from the Dust of the Saint's Feet, ;
And for him the distinction of the delivered and the bound® is no more, {4-26-96 ony “*
. 5

1. Sara (aug) : ( Sams. dereq) fir, Withdrawal, detachment (from the world) ; hence intense Jonging for the Real.

Woman here denoies the body, husband the life in it.
was yare (PRareTEIT) ; Wasnt is a ceremony after marriage when the bride leaves for her in-laws.

2

3.

4, =-fga (4-ga7), bad deed ; A-fys (4-Fa) sood deed.

3. gg nNeeAl (aa ameat) : BB-BaH] (the knower of quintessence)--mHeenl (who looks upon all alike).
6. af wfgafs (aff afaafr) : also manifest, unmanifest.

Page 9
[ 50]

Sri Rag M. 5

Hopeful of Thy Mercy, O Dear, I indulged in pleasures :

I forsook Thy Path ; but lam Thy child, O Thou, my Father and Mother! /J/

Easy it is to say and utter,

But far harder to accept Thy Will. /J-Pawse/

I pride on Thee for I know Thou art mine.

Thou art within all and yet beyond all, our Father, who is dependent on no one. [2]

Father, I know not which is Thy Way ?

O Saints, through Him is the Release from Bondage and our Ego departs. [3] P. 52
The Master in His Mercy has Ended my comings and goings,

And, on meeting with the Guru, Nanak has Realised his Lord. [4-27-97]

Sri Rag M. 5

They, who met with the Saints, knew no Death.

Into them Came the True Master, the Lord, the Merciful.

They Met the Perfect Guru, and ended all their involvements. {JJ

O my True Guru, I offer myself to Thee.

Blessed, Blessed is Thy Sight ; in Thy Mercy, Thou Blest me with Thy Nectar-Name. /J-Pause/
They, who Served Thee with Love, are the persons Wise.

They, who Treasure Thy Name, Delivered the others too of (Bondage).

No, no one is thy benefactor equal to the Guru, who gave thee the gift of the Soul*. 2]
Blessed are they, whom the Guru received with Love’.

Imbued with his Love, one gets a Seat in the Lord's Court.

All Glory is in God's Hands ; one gets it if it was so Writ by God, [3]

True is the Creator, True the Cause ; True the Master's Support :

Utter thou the Truth, for through Truth does one get Light for the intellect.

Nanak lives by the Remembrance of Him who Pervades all, all over. [4-28-98]

Sri Rag M. 5

Worship thy Guru, thy God, with Love in thy body and mind,

Thy True Guru is the Bestower of Bliss ; He is the Mainstay of all,

Practise thou the Word of the Truc Guru—this, indeed, is the True philosophy.

Without the Society of the Holy, all attachment to Maya was dust. /J]

O my friend, gather-in the Name of the Lord.

Thy mind will rest in Peace in the Assembly of the Holy, and thou shalt be Fulfilled. /J-Pawse]
All-powerful and Infinite is the Guru ; Fortunate is the one who seeks His Sight,
Incemprehensible’, Immaculate and Pure is He ; no one can equal the Guru,

He is the Creator and the Cause ; through Him is all Glory,

Without the Guru, there is no one ; and all that happens is in His Will. [2

The Guru is the Place of Pilgrimage; the Guru the da/pa-tree® ; the Guru the fulfiller of our mind’s Desire.
The Guru is the Giver of the Name, wherewith the whole world is Saved,

All-powerful is He, the Formless One on High, Unknowable and Vast ;

Incfiable is His Praise ; what cana sayer say 7 [3]

All the Rewards our mind seeks are in the Guru’s Hands ;

If it were so Writ in one’s Destiny, He Blesses one with the Treasure of the True Name,

If one seeks the Refuge of the True Guru, one dies not again.

Nanak forgets not the Lord who has Blest him with life and a Soul. [4-29-99]

Sri Rag M. 5

Listen ye, brother Saints, your Release is through the True Name.
Worship ye the Guru's Feet and know ye that the Lord’s Name is the only Place of Pilgrimage.
In the other world, ye are accepted and find a Place in the Lord’s Court. /J/ P. 52

1. afm (qf4)—sfs, compassion, mercy.

MSH ers (ATE) : the gift of Atman (or super-consciousness).

male (qeTs) = A4-ate ; with kind consideration.

negieg (aritts) : (Sans. anjhqz) : Jit. imperceptible by the senses,

wana (arerg) : the coral tree, one of the five wish fulfilling trees of heaven.

ween

322392209 Guru-Granth Sali
© brother, the Service of the Guru alone is True.

When the Guru is Merciful, we find the Perfect Lord, the All-fillmg, Unknowable He. //-Patise}
1 offer myself to the Guru who Blest me with the True Name.

And I Sing the Praises of the True One, day and night.

1 wear the Truth, eat the Truth ; and have the True Name in my heart. [2/
Forget not Him, therefore, in life and in joy ; yea, He who is of Perfect Form.
Dwell on Him, night and day, for there is no one to equal Him.

We receive the True Name, the Treasure of Good, if His Grace be upon us. [3]
The Guru and the God are one: God Pervades all, everywhere.

They, for whom it was so Writ, Dwelt on the Lord's Name.

Nanak seeks the Refuge of the Guru who is born not te dic. /4-30-J00)

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Enlightener-
Sri Rag M. 1, Ashtapadis

I Play? upon my mind's instrument (the Tune of His Praise) ; The more I Know of Him, the more
ay.

How Great is He and where is He, the One, to whom we sing ?

He, who speaks of Him, is Merged in His Peace at last. [J]

O dear, Allah is Unknowable and Vast.

He, the Sustainer of life, is of Pure Name and has a Pure Place, yea, He is the True One. [1-Pause]

No one knows His Will ; no one can write of His Glory.

Even if a hundred poets? were to sing, not even a little of Him can ther oe describe.

Not one has found His Value, and say they all only what they hear.

The Pirs, the Prophets, the Spiritual guides*, the men of faith’ and innocence’, the martyrs,

The Sheikhs, the Qazis, the Mullahs, and the Fakirs in His Presence®

Are Blest the more’ they say their Prayers*®, 3]

He seeks no one’s counsel when He Builds, nor when He Razes things to the dust ;

He Gives and Takes as He Wills.

He alone is the Knower of His Will, and He Does all by Himself,

His Grace is upon all, but Gives He to him whom He Wills. [4]

We know not His Name, His Place ; nor how Great is His Name,

Nor, how High is His Place, where He Lives.

When no one can reach Him, then whom shall I go to ask ? [5]

If the Lord Blesses one caste, the other caste likes it not.

But, He in His Hands, has all the Glory and He Gives to whomsoever He Pleases.

He Makes His Will work —without a moment's delay. 6}

All His beneficiaries say : ‘He is Great and High”,

But know not how Beneficent is He.

Says Nanak, ‘‘The Lord’s Store-house is Brimful throughout ages ; and He lacks in nothing’. 7-1]
P, 54

M.1

We all are the Brides* of the Lord, and Bedeck ourselves (for His Pleasure),
But if we are proud of our Beauty, no use then are our Red Robes.

We find not Love through deceit ; the false show avails not (with God). [J/
The Spouse Enjoys the Bride, whom He Likes ;

And she alone is His Bride, whom He Honours by His Grace. /J-Pawse/

l. gmer (aren) : (Sans. aTaq), ta play upon an instrument.

2. wtfed (are) : (Persian, arfea), poet.

Hisa@ (aren) : (Arabic), spiritual guides,

Wea (ane) : lit, men of faith (fez).

aoe (ag¢) : fit, the innocents.

efs egen arte (afc e<aq tits) : the Saints (egen) who have reached (ante) His Door (ea),
nae (ama) : larger, greater.

wage (ez) : (Persian), prayer.

Hgeten (qgetar) : (Sans. ufger), women, brides.

Guru-Granth Salih OoQQZa2O999909¢9
Page 10

Pent ayay

cy SCOSSESLCSSSSOOSSSoSssce CHES

Page 101

[ 52 |

The Guru's Word is the Bride's decoration and, so bedecked, she Surrenders herself to her Lord,

And with joined palms she stands in wait for Him and prays in all sincerity. — oo

Such is the Bride of True Colour, Imbued with His Love, Decked in the Glorious Red and living in Fear
of the Lord, [2/

She is known! as the True Bride who, like a slave?, wholly Surrenders to the Lord's Name.

Her true Love snaps not, and she Unites with her Lord.

She, who is Imbued with the Word, whose mind is pierced through (with Love), unto her lama
Sacrifice. /3/ ‘

The Bride is widowed not, if she Merges in her True Lord,

Who is Beauteous, Ever-fresh, True and is never born ta die.

The Spouse Enjoys her and Keeps her in His Grace. [4]

© thou Bride, Bedeck? thy hair with Truth, Wear thou the Wear of Love : :

Gather-in the Chandan-like (God) in thy conscious mind and live thou in the temple of inner
consciousness*, ;

Thy soul cone through the Word —this then is thy Light ; and thou Wearest the Lord's Name in thy
heart. {3

Beauteous is the woman who bedecks her Forehead with the Jewel of Love.

And, this is her glory that she Cherishes in her mind the Love of the True Lord.

(But), without the Love of the True Guru, she knows not the Lord, her Spouse. /6/

She who Sleeps the dark Night through, O how can she pass the Night (without her Lord) ?

Burn down, O woman, thy body, each bit of it and thy mind too: .

(For) Vain is thy Beauty that wastes itself away without thy Master Enjoying thee. /{7/

The Bride is she who sleeps, care-free, in her Lord's Embrace.

Lo, my Lord is Awake, while ] Sleep : (then), who shall I go to ask (about Him) ? ,

The True Guru has United Nanak with the Lord ; and he lives in His Fear and the Lord's Love is his
only company. /8-2/

Sri Rag M. 1

Thou the Lord art Thy Own Attribute ; Thou the one who Utterest, Hearest and Dwellest on it.

. Thou Thyself art the Jewel, Thou Thyself the Valuator ; (but} beyond Value art Thou,

Thou, O Lord, art Honour and Glory ; Thou art the Giver of them. [J

Thou art the Creator and the Cause.

Keep me in Thy Will that I am Embellished with the culture of Thy Name. {1—Pause]

Thou art the Pure Diamond ; Thou the fast colour of madder :

Thou art the Pure Jewel, Thou Thy Own Devotee and Thou the Intercessor.

Through the Guru’s Word art Thou Praised, Thou, who dost not seem but art in every heart. [2]
Thou Thyself art the Sea and the Boat, Thou art this side and that.

He, who knows the True Path, through the Word, Swims across (the Sea of Material Existence).
And he, who Fears not (the Lord), is afraid, for without Him is all Darkness. [3/

Eternal is our Creator ; the others but come and go.

He alone is Pure—the others are trapped by Illusion.

They, whose mind was fixed upon the True One, were Saved by the Guru. [4] P. 55
They, who realised their Lord, the God, through the Guru's True Word,

Remained Pure, for they abided in the Abode of Truth.

We attain to the Lord’s Truth if (the Lord’s) Grace be upon us ; without the Lord’s Name who is our
Kindred ? [3]

They, who Realised the Truth, were Happy through the four ages.

Their Ego and Desire were stilled ; and they Wore the Truth in their hearts.

The true Reward (of life) is the Lord’s Name ; we attain to it by Dwelling on the Guru's (Word). /6/

If Truth be our Merchandise and Carriage, and Truth be our Capital—we earn too the Profit of Truth.
We sit in the Lord’s True Court ; for the Prayer of the Devotee is for Truth ;

Our account is settled with Honour ; and the Lord’s Name Lights (our hearts). [7/

They all say : “Thou art Highest of the high”, but who hath Seen Thee, O Lord ?

It is the Guru who makes me See (Thee), and then I See Thee Wherever J See.

And then, says Nanak, “I See the Light hid within me, all-too-spontaneously®". /8-3/

1. giant (width) : is so called.

2. gal (ara) ; (Persian) slave.

3. Hah (shit) : (Sans, #2) to decorate.

4, Seg vifs safes, Hea eet arg (atq aifa wargar, H7e taTaT gare) : to enshrine Him in the conscious mind

(ifs) is to apply the scented Chandan to oneself. To open up one's Tenth Door (Super-consciousness) is (to enter into)
the holy of holies (Hea),

5, fsdafa (Freafe) ; deep down within one’s self (nfafg); also, wholly attuned.

DOOD DOOIIOOVDIOVIOODODIIIIIIIIII223322339000290 Guru-Granth Bahib
Sri Rag M. 1

The fish saw not the net cast in the deep saltish sea.

© thou wondrous, beauteous thing, why didst thou trust (thy eyes) ?

Now thou art trapped for thy own folly and Death is upon thy head, /J/

So art thou trapped by Death, O man, :

Like the fish, thou art also caught in the net, unawares. {l-Pause]

The whole world is bound to die ; One is rid’ not of Death, without the Guru's (Grace),
They, who were Imbued with the Truth, were Saved, and they cast away their Doubt and Sin.
Iam a Sacrifice unto them who are found True at the True Court, /2/

As the hawk? js to the birds and the net is in the hunters’ hands,

So are we all caught by the Bait, save those on whom is the Guru's Grace.

Without the Lords Name we are cast aside ; and there is no one to render help. /3/]
True is He called, True is His Place ;

They, who accepted Him as True, their minds Dwelt in Truth.

Their minds and mouths are Pure, who are Wise in the Guru's Way. [4]

Pray thou to the True Guru that he Unites thee with thy Spouse.

And thou attainest Peace and the Angel of Death takes poison and dies.

I Abide in the Lord’s Name : the Name Abides in my mind. /35/

Without the Guru all is Darkness : but without the Word, we realise it not.

Through the Guru's Wisdom one’s mind is [lumined and one is Attuned to Truth,
There death cometh? not, for one’s Light Mergeth in the All-light. /6/

Thou, O God, art the Friend, the Wise One, who United me (with Thyself).

Through the Guru's Word, I Praise Thee ; but there is no end to Thy Praise.

There Death reaches not where there is the Infinite Word of the Guru. 7]

In thy Will, O Lord, are ‘all Created ; in Thy Will do all do the deeds.

In Thy Will are we subject to death ; in Thy Will do ‘we Merge in Truth. ‘
Says Ninak, “That alone happens what He Wills ; for nothing is in the hands of man”. f&-4]

Sri Rag M. 1

If thy mind is Impure, Impure are also thy body and tongue.

If thou speakest Untruth, how can thy mouth be Pure ?

Without the water‘ of the Word, one is cleansed not ; (for) from Truth springs Purity. [J] P. 56
O Woman, where is Happiness without Merit ?

Thy Spouse will enjoy thee if thou findest Peace im the Love of the True Word. [/-Pause]
When the Spouse is away, the Bride grieves in separation,

Like the fish out.of water crying for pity.

When the Lord Wills and Favours with His Grace, we find Gladness, [2]

Praise then thy Lord in the company of thy Friends,

Thy body brightens up, thy mind is in rapture and thou See-est thy Lord, Imbued with His Love.
She, who is Bedecked with the (beauteous) Word, and has Merit, Enjoys her Spouse. {3/

What use is the Evil Bride without Merit ?

She is neither happy at her Parents’, nor In-laws’, and she burns in (the Fire of) Evil.

Her Spouse deserts her and her comings-and-goings are hard. [4]

Why did the Spouse forsake His beauteous woman ?

For, she was no use to Him and vain® was her prattle®.

Now, she finds no support in the Lord’ s Home, and is Deserted for she sought other pleasures. /3/
The Pundit reads the Books, but gives no thought to them ;

He instructs the others, but himself trades in Maya.

Through false prattle is the world deluded ; True living is in the (Guru's) Word alone, [6]
Many are the Pundits and the diviners of future who read the Vedas ;

But they waste away life after life in the clash of arguments which they cherish,

Without the Guru’s Grace, whoever is ever saved by mere talk ? {7}

1. fer (arare) : seems to be a corrupt form of wfgg (that which cannot be prevented or held); also, great, wild,
2. rites (tary) : a red-headed hunting bird, smaller than a hawk.

3. Had (Hat) : (Sans. Fqz), to go.

4, stg (am) : also means the inner Self.

5. gem (srfeq) ge : useless.
6. athe (arfe) : (Sans. arq), discursive argument.

Page 10
[ 54 ]

All have Merit save myself, O Lord,
And Beauty too ; but I Love thee my only Lord ;
And I Meet Thee through the Guru's Word and then thou Forsakest me not, [8-5]

Sri Rag M. 1

I meditate and practise austerity, and discipline my body and live at a holy place,

And give away in charity and do good deeds, but, without the True Lord, of what avail are all these ?
AS one 50W5, 50 One reaps,

And, without Merit, life passes away in vain. [//

© Woman, be thou the slave of Good, and attam Bliss,

And, Merge in the Perfect One through the Guru’s Word. /J/-Pawse/

Without Capital, the Trader looks about in the four continents (in vain),

For he knows not the Reality that his Capital lies buried within himself.

Without the Merchandise, he grieves and prieves : the False one is deceived by Falschood. f2]
He, who has the Knowledge of the Jewel (within himself), reaps profit, over and over again,
And gathers his Goods at home and Fulfils himself.

(O. mind), Trade with the True Traders and Dwell on the Lord, through the Guru's Word, {3
One finds Him in the Society of the Saints, if only He Unites us with them.

He, in whom bums the dazzling Light (of the Lord’s Name), is Forsaken not by the Lord,

His seat is True, He lives in Truth and loves the True (Master), /4/

They, who Knew themselves, found the Palace (of Peace) in their own good Homes.

Imbued with the True One, they gathered the Lord’s Truth alone.

The Lord is known in all the three worlds ; His Name too is eternally True. /5/ P. 57
That Woman is Beauteous who found her Lord within herself.

She is called to the Palace and the Spouse Enjoys her in Love.

She is the True Bride, for she has won her Love by her Merits. /6/

If I lose my way on the earth, I may go to wander upon a mountain,

But lost in the woods, | find not the way without a guide.

If I forget the Lord's Name, for me are then ceaseless comings and goings. /7/

Ask the Wayfarers how by being the Lord’s Slaves (they found the Way) ?

They looked upon Him as the King, and were stopped not at the Door of His Castle.

Nanak : the One alone Pervades all ; and there is no one other than Him. /&-6/

Sri Rag M.1

From the Guru, we find the Pure (Lord), and our body also becomes Pure.

He, the True, the Immaculate One, Comes into our minds, for He Knows the Pangs of ovr hearts.

And one attains the Peace of Equipoise and the Yama’s arrow hits one not. [//

If one washes oneself in Pure Water, one is cleansed,

Elsewhere is all Dirt : yea, He, the True One, is thy only Pure Lord. {/-Pause}

The God's Temple (within thee) is Beauteous ; He, the Creator, has Caused it.

How wondrous the lights of the sun and the moon; (but the Lord's) Light is in the three worlds,

(In thyself are) the Ships, the Cities, the Fortresses, and the Huts where the Trade is of Truth alone. {2}

The Collyrium of Knowledge dispels all fear, and one Sees the Pure One in His Love.

We know the (mystery of the) apparent and the Real, if we keep our minds at Peace.

If one finds the True Guru, one is United with the Lord, the natural way. /3/

He Tests us on His Touchstone with Love and attention :

The False (Coins) find not a place, but the True ones are Gathered in His Treasury.

Our Desire and Doubt depart and, Merged in God, our Dirt is washed off. [4]

Everyone craves for happiness ; who is it that wants sorrow ?

And, to earn happiness, one goes through pain, but the self-willed know it not.

But, one attains Poise and Jocks upon pain and pleasure alike, if one pierces (the heart) through with
the Word. /S/]

If one reads the Vedas and considers the holy Word of Vyasa,

One finds that all the Rishis, the Lord's Devotees and men of spiritual discipline, were Imbued with the
Lord’s Name, the Treasure of all Good.

They, who were so Imbued, Won (the Game of Life) ; I am ever a Sacrifice unto them. [6/

They, in whose mouths the Lord's Name is not, they abide in Mud the four ages through.

Without the Love of Devotion, their Faces are Blackened and they get Dishonour.

They Weep, deluded by Vice, who forget the Lord’s Name. [7/
T sought and sought and found (Him) ; In His Fear I was United with Him.
If one Knows oneself, Nanak, and abides in his Home, his Ego and Desire depart.
For they are the Purest of the pure, who are [Immersed in the Lord’s Name. [8-7]

Sri Rag M. 1

Hear thou, O my deluded mind, take to the Feet of the Guru.

Call on thy Lord and Meditate on the Name that Death fears thee and thy Woes depart.

The Deserted Wife abides ever in Sorrow ; how can her Spouse bide with her? [J/

O brother, I have no other place to go ; P. 58

My only Wealth is the Lord's Name that | Received from the Guru to whom I am a Sacrifice, [J—Pause]

Through the Guru's Wisdom comes honour ; Blessed is the Guru : Him I seek to Meet.

Without Him, I Live not for a moment : without God’s Name, I Die.

Let me not forget the Lord's Name: for me, the Blind one, His is the only Guide to reach my Home. [2]

They, whose Guru is Blind, what guidance can they seek from him ?

Without the True Guru, one Receives not the Lord's Name ; and what use (is life) without the Lord's

Name ? :

And one regrets one's coming and going like the crow visiting a deserted house. [3]

Without the Lord’s Name, the body writhes in Pain ; it is like the wall of sand.

We get not to the Lord's Palace till our conscious mind accepts the Lord's Truth.

Irmersed in the Word, we find the Lord's Name and enter into the state of eternal Nirvan! [4] 3

Task my Guru,“Pray tell me, how shall I go Thy Way ?”’ 4)

(And He says) : “Keep the Lord’s Praise in thy mind ; and burn down the agony of thy Ego. 2

And thou shalt Meet thy Lord in the Region of Bliss ; for the True One is Met through Truth.” fs]

They, who are Imbued with the Word are Pure ; they shed their Lust, Anger and Ego.

They praise the Lord's Name for ever and keep the Lord in their hearts. 2

Why forget Him, then, who is the Mainstay of all life? /6/

He, who Dies in the Word, dies not again. 3

From the Word, do we Attain to the Lord and Love the God’s Name. 2)

Without the Word, the world is led astray and is born to die again and over again. [7] 4)

Everyone lauds himself—one more than the other:  -. co]

But, without the Guru, we Know not the Self ; what use is one’s mere talk 7 °

[8-8] :

&
)

If one Realises the Word, Nanak, one prides not omtmeself.

Sri Rag M. 1

Without the Spouse, why bedeck thyself, OQ Woman, for all thy beauty is vain.

All thy decoration is like the (empty) wind, for thou Enjoyest not the Bed of the Spouse.

They, whose lords are not at home, their days pass in utter sorrow, alone in bed. [J]

O my mind, Meditate on the Lord's Name to get Peace.

(But), one finds not one’s Love without the Guru : In His Word is all Pleasure. {J— Pause]

In the Guru’s Service, one attains Happiness : Decked with a tranquil mind, one finds the Lord.
Through Truth, one Enjoys the Spouse and Loves Him utterly.

Through the Guru is He Realised ; Meeting the Lord, one gathers Spiritual Culture. [2]

Through Truth, O Woman, Meet thou thy Lord and thou wilt be Enticed by Him with Love.

Thy body and mind will flower in Truth, and thy State will be invaluable,

Through the Lord's Name, thou becomest Pure, and findest thy Love nm thy Home. /3/]

If Ego* dies in the mind, the Groom Enjoys the Bride,

As pearls on a string, the two are woven into one.

In the Holy Society comes Peace to them and, through the Guru, they lean on the Lord’s Name. [4]
One is born and in a moment, one wears oneself out, and then one dies,

But he, who Realises the Word and Merges in it, Time for him stands still,

The Lord is ineffable, beyond value, /5 P. 59
The Traders (who Deal with Him) have the Reward Writ in their Lot.

They Trade in Truth, and reap the Profit by His Grace.

Their ‘Vrue Capital is the Guru who is devoid of all avarice and guile, [6/

Truth is their Balance ; Truth their Weights ; by the Guru's Grace, Truth is the Thing they Weigh. ?
Desire and Hope, which allure all, are stilled by the Guru, whose Word is Truth. ;
He, the Lord Himself, Weighs and Weighs up perfectly. [7]
1, aafe ad wa weba (vale ct qe ange) : being imbued (al) with the Word, we enter into our home, (i¢., the
inmer Self). ; 2
2. Han (HAH) : ego of the mind (Ha), a

4]
Guru-Granth Sahib 999999999999999999990909999999999999038999990090%

Page 10
[ 56]

By mere talk (of Him), we are Saved not ; nor by reading a load of books.
Without Loving Adoration, one’s body is cleansed not.
Forget not, therefore, the Lord’s Name, O Nanak, which one Receives from the Guru and God, = /a-9]

Sri Rag M. 1

If we Meet with the Troe Guru, we are Blest with the Jewel of Discrimination :

And we Surrender our minds to the Guru and Attain to the All-Love.

We Reccive the Gift of Salvation and our Sins are washed away, /J]

© brother, there is no Wisdom without the Guru.

Ask thou Lord Brahma, or Narada, (the sage) or Vyasa, the writer of the Vedas. /{/-Pause/

From the (Guru's) Word, one attains Wisdom and Intuition; the Guru alone makes us utter the
Unutterable,

He is the Green Tree in Fruit, of abundant Shade.

The Rubies, the Pearls, the Jewels, arc in the Treasure of the Guru. f2/

From the Guru's Treasure do we receive Love of the Immaculate Name,

And we gather the True, Indescribable Goods, when our True (Destiny is Awakened).

He the Lord, Gives Happiness ; through the Guru, do our Woes depart and the (five) Demons’ are
decimated. /3/

‘The Sea is rough and dreadful ; I know not its Shores.

1 am without a Boat or a Raft ; neither is there a Boatman nor the Rows.

The only Vessel on the dreadful (Sea) is the True Guru, whose Eye of Grace takes me across. /4#]

If I forget the Lord for a moment, I am in Sorrow and my Peace departs.

Burnt be that tongue which recites not the Lord's Name with Love.

When the body’s pitcher breaks, one writhes in pain, and, trapped by the Fama, one grieves. [5/

Many have perished in their wails of ‘me, my and mine”, but neither their bodies, nor their brides, nor
riches, kept them company.

Without the Lord’s Name, all wealth is vain ; one loses one’s Way, lured by Mayat.

Serve, therefore, the True Master and, by the Guru’s Grace, utter the Unutterable, /6/

One wanders from birth to birth, doing what is in his Destiny.

How could the Writ of Eternity be erased, when the Writ is by His Will.

Without the Lord's Name, nothing can Save thee, and through the Guru’s Word, is the Lord Met, [7]

T have no one to call my own without Him who Gave me life and soul.

Burnt be ye, O my Ego and Avarice, my Pride and love of the self.

Nanak : by Dwelling on the Word is the Treasure of All Good received. /8-J0]

Sri Rag M. 1
O my mind, Love thy Lord, like the lotus loves the water.
The waves shake it to the roots ; but it blossoms forth in love.
The life living in water dies without it. [J/. P. 60
O my mind, one is Saved not without Love.
The God-wards are saturated with God ; them He Blesses with the Treasure of His Love. [J-Pause]
O my mind, Love thy Lord, as the fish loves the water.
The more? the water, the more she revels and her body and mind are at peace.
Without the water she lives not fora moment ; her pangs of separation are known only to the Lord. {2/7
O my mind, love the Lord, as the Charrik-bird loves the rains.
All the pools are brimful and the earth is green, (but not for him): he longs only for the ‘blessed’ drop,
Through His Grace does the Lord Give ; As are our deeds, so He Giveth*. [3] ;
O my mind, Love thy Lord, as the water loves the milk.
He suffers himself the heat, but the milk he saves.
The Lord alone Unites the Separated, and in Unison grants them the Glory of Truth, /4/
O my mind, Love thy Lord, as the Chakvi loves the sun. ;
She sleeps not for a moment, and he, that 1s far, him she thinks to be near at hand.
The self-willed do not know ; but to the God-wards the Lord's Presence is ever real. [3
The self-willed count their doings; (they know not) that it is God who Does what He Wills.
His Glory, one cannot Value, try as much as one may.
Through the Guru's Word, we find Him, and, on Meeting with the Lord's Truth, we find Peace. /6/

I. Lust, wrath, avarice, attachment and ego.
2. ofa farfe) : Maya. (see p. 6)
3. »ifoad (afires) : (from (faa), more.
4. gaffe A oueb, fows ufeer fafa oo (arefy fat at angi, feng ager fake 2g): As are our deeds (faag),
accordingly (fnfe) He giveth (Gq), But itis through His Grace (qafH) that we are even so blest and receive justly the
3 deserts of our deeds.

Page 105 
True Love breaks not, if one meets with the True Guru,

We get the Gift of Wisdom, and Know the secret of the three worlds.

If one seeks to gather Merit, one must abandon not the (Lord's) Immaculate Name. /{7/

Gone are the Birds who pecked at the banks of the Pool.

A brief moment and then we pass away; the Play is for a day or two.

One is United with Thee if Thou so Willest, O Lord, and one Wins the True Game. /8/

Without the Guru, Love springs not ; nor the Dirt of Ego goes.

When the Word pierces the body through, one is satiated and cries out, “He is me’’?

Through the Guru alone one Knoweth oneself : who else can doathing? [9

They, who are already in Unison with the Lord, for them there is no other Union. Through the Word

are they Satiated.
The self-willed know it not and they grieve in Separation.
Nanak : His is the Door, His the Home, and there is no other Place (to go to). {10-I1/

Sri Rag M. 1

The self-willed are deluded and find no place of Rest.

Without the Guru, one Sees not; like the Blind one, one comes and goes (in vain).

He, who loses the Light of Wisdom, is beguiled. 1)

O dear, Maya deludes by its illusion :

Such a Bride is separated (from her Lord), and the Master takes her not in His Embrace, [/-Pause]
She wanders about from place to place, and is lost to her Home.

In Doubt, her mind wavers, and she goes up and down (in vain).

How can she, who was Separated, Meet her Lord? /2/

Indeed she can, through the Love of the Lord’s Name.

Through Truth and Poise does one get great Glory and one makes the Lord's Name one’s Mainstay. P. 61
Keep me Thou, O Lord, as Thou Willest ; O my Spouse, who else is there for me? [3]
We read books and are lost im appearances and Ego.

What use is one’s bathing m holy waters, when the mind is girt by ego’s Dirt ?

How shall we instruct our kingly mind, save with the Guru's (Word)? [4] -

We gather the Jewel of Love through the Guru by Dwelling on the Real One.

The Bride then loses herself and Bedecks herself with the Word,

And finds her Spouse in her very Home, through the infinite Love of the Lord. [3]

In the Guru's Service, the mind becomes Pure and one attains Peace:

When the Guru's Word comes into the mind, Ego departs from within,

And we receive the Jewel of the (Lord’s) Name, and our mind gathers the Gain. /6/

If His Grace be upon us, we find Him; of ourselves, we receive Him not.

Take thou to the Feet of the Guru, forgetting thyself.

If thou art Imbued with Truth, Truth forsooth wilt thou gather {(7]

All arc apt to be deluded—but not the Guru-God.

Through the Guru’s Word is the mind instructed and one loves one's Lord.

And one forgets not the Truth which one gathers from the Infinite Word. — {8-/2)

Sri Rag M. 1

The desire for Maya attaches one to one’s wife, sons and kinsmen, : ”
And one is beguiled by riches and beauty and Avarice and Ego,

Ah me, I am cheated of my Consciousness by Maya's Poison which permeates the world. . {J}.
O my Love, I have no one but Thee. ;
Without Thee, I like nought ; and by Loving Thee I am at Peace.’ [J-Pause]
Praise (O my mind), the (Lord" $) Name with love : in the Guru's Word is Peace.
All that seems, goes ; attach not thyself to the false show,

You are a traveller on the way ; see you not your company passing away, each day? [2]

Say they all, but without the Guru, no one Knows.
If one Receives the Glory of the (Lord's) Name, one is imbued with Truth and one attains Honour.

All whom Thou likest, O Lord, are good ; (of oneself) one is neither good nor bad. [3/
If we seek the Refuge of the Guru, we are Saved ; the Egocentrics have false Merchandise.
All the eight Metals* belong to the King ; He Fashions (his Coins with them); and through the Word,

do all sparkle.
He Himself Tests each Coin (on the Touchstone),.and that which is True is gathered in His Treasury. [4]

1. fd wy ugha safe afe ustefe (aig ary vert aafe wife vitae) : When one is satiated with the’ essence
(#fe) of the Word (maf), one realises (ure) within oneself (om) that I T()ae am He (f). 7
2. i¢., the entire creation. \ tae my?

Me .

Guru-Grenth Sahib 9999900929999929999900000009999999993009:
Page 106 www. sikhbookelub. com

As Ae ie

4

PLOSLOCEECCEOOSEESEL SOOCOSOCOOHCOCEROCOL ESE OBELEOSOELO HOOSLOOCOGOE

le
[ 58

How can one value (His Glory)? I have seen and tested all,

One cannot find His Measure ; if one abides in God's Truth, one gets Honour,
Through the Guru's Word, I Praise Him ; in no otherwise can_I value my Lord, /3/
The body that likes not the Lord's Name, in it is the tumult of Ego.

Without the Guru, one attains not Wisdom ; all else is distraction and poison,

Maya’s taste is tasteless ; without Virtue, nothing avails [6]

One is cast into the Womb of Desire ; (and delivered), it tastes (nothing but) Desire.
If one lives trapped by Desire, one suffers ‘blows’ in the face.

Bound down and struck by Vice, one is Released only through the Guru’s Word. = /7/

In all places art Thou, the only Lord, keep me Thou in Thy Will. ; P. 62
Through the Guru's Word, the True Lord comes into our minds ; in the company of His Name is all
Honour,

Whereby we lose the disease of Ego ; and through the True Word we say the Truth. [8]
Thou, O Lord, art in the skies, in the underworlds ; and in all the three worlds ;

Thou art the Love, Thou the Worship ; of Thyself Thou Unitest us with Thyself.

Let Nanak not forget Thy Name ; and let Thy Will work as Thou Willest. /9-/3/

Sri Rag M. 1

With the Lord's Name is my Mind Pierced through ; what else is now for me to dwell upon ?

In the consciousness of the Word is Peace ; Imbued with the Lord, one is in utter Happiness.

Keep me as Thou Willest, Lord, for Thy Name is my only Succour. [J]

O my mind, submit to the Master's Will ;

He who bedecked thy body and mind, on Him thou Dwell. /J-Pause]}

Offer like incense thy every bit to the Fire (of the Lord) ;

Make thy body the Firewood! and light it (with His Love) night and day.

Nothing can equal the Lord’s Name, even if one practises myriads of good deeds; [2]

Even if one cuts up his body into two, and gets his head sawn ;

Or if one wastes away his body in a niche of the Himalayas, his mind's Disease is cured not.

Nothing, O nothing, can equal the God's Name : I have tested (and found wanting) all other ways. [3]

Abiding in the fortresses of gold, if one disburses fine horses and elephants in charity,

And lands too, and many cows, the mind's ego leaves one not.

If the Lord's Name pierces the mind through, the Guru bestows the Gift of Truth. {4}

One's intellect (may be sharpened) by the mimd’s hard discipline; and the Vedas one may read through;

(But) one’s soul is trapped by snares of many kinds : through virtue alone the Guru opens unto us the
Door of Salvation,

Truth is the highest of all Virtues ; but higher still is the living of Truth. /3/

Everyone is high, not one seems low to me ;

For, He, the only Potter, has made all Vessels; from His Light is the light of the three worlds.

Through His Grace one Receives the Truth, and no one can erase the Gift of Eternity. [6]

When a Saint meets with a Saint, through the Guru's love, he finds Peace.

Jf one Merges in the True Guru, the Unutierable Truth is dwelt upon.

One drinks Nectar and is in Peace ; at the Lord’s Court he gets the Robe of Honour, [7J

In all hearts rings the Music of the (Lord's) Flute*, and one loves spontaneously? the Word, night and day,

Rare are they who know this : through the Guru is their mind made Wise.

Forget not then the Lord’s Name, © Nanak, for one is Delivered (only) by practising the Word. (a-/4]

Sri Rag M. 1

Decorated are thy palaces ; white-painted are thy beautiful mansions :

Thou hast raised them for thy mind's pleasure ; (but) all this is love of Maya.

Thy inner self is vacant without Love ; thy bady will be reduced to the dust. [J/

© brother, neither riches nor thy body goes along with thee,

The Lord's Name is the Real Wealth and it is gifted away to thee by the Guru. {J-Payse]
The Lord's Name is Immaculate ; only if the Giver were to Give (it to us) !

He, whose Protector is the Guru-God, he is questioned not Hereafter,

If God Delivers us, we are Delivered ; for it is He alone who Forgives. [2]

1. wor (waa) ¢ the firewood that is burnt im the Aavan-kunda.
2. faqel (feqtt) : fazet, : Veena.
3. ganfe (Te) 2 q--atfe, with real q love (atfe), Le, spontaneously,

Page 10
The Egocentric thinks the daughters, sons and kins are his. P. 63
He is excited, seeing his wife and enjoying pleasures—but they lead to Pain. :

The God-wards are wrapt in the Ecstasy of the Word and Enjoy the Lord day and night, [3]
When our riches go, we are shaken in the mind and the worshipper of Maya wavers (in his faith).
Why go ye to find the Goods without : (for), these are within your sacred Home.

The Egocentrics are beguiled by Ego ; but the God-wards receive them forsooth, [4]

O worshipper of power, know you not your worth ?

Of (mother’s) blood and father's sperm are you made and will one day be made over? to the fire.
And, forsooth, it is in your lot? that air be the Mainstay of thy life. /3/

(And yet) all seek to live long enough and no one is ready for death.

But, True life is his in whose heart Dwelis the Lord, through the Guru’s Grace.

Of what account is one without the Lord's Name, who believes in neither the Guru, nor God? /o/
As we forget the night in the dream so long as we are asleep,

So is the life beguiled by the Serpent (of Maya), and in our minds dwell Ego and Duality.

Through the Guru's Word do we Realise, and See that this world is but adream. [7]

The fire is quenched with water ; the child is sated with the mother's milk;

The lotus flowers not without water; the fish dies without it :

So Nanak craves for the Lord's Pleasure; and he lives by singing the Praises of the Lord. /8-/5]

Sri Rag M. 1

The height of the (God's) Mountain’ frightens me ; dreadful to me also is the world".

How hard® is the mounting on to the High ; no steps can reach upto it®,

Through the Guru, I found the Mountain within my inner Self and am Saved. {J

O brother, hard is the lashing Sea of Material Existence ; it fills one with fear.

If | meet with the Perfect Guru, in His pleasure He Saves me through the Lord's Word, [J-Pause]

Remind thou-ever thyself of death ; for he who came must go ; only the Guru-God is eternal.

So Praise thy True Lord and Love thou the Abode of Truth. [2]

Thy mansions are beauteous ; thy thousand forts are solidly built.

‘Thou hast elephants, horses and their saddles, and vast hosts of millions.

But nothing goeth along with thee ; like a fool? thou hast wasted away thy life. /3}

If we gather gold and silver and a confusion of goods,

And with the beat of drum is our authority announced to the whole world, yet Death overtakes us,
without the Lord's Name.

When the body falls, the life’s play is over*, how shall the evil-doers be dealt with then? [4]

We are joyed to see our sons ; the husband is pleased with the wife and his bed ;

We apply the essence of roses and Chandan and deck ourselves with beauteous clothes,

But dust to dust returns and one forsakes one’s home and its pleasures, /5/

We may be renowned as leaders, kings, Rajas and chiefs,

And Chaudhris and Raos; but all this is burning oneself in Ego.

The Egocentrics, who forget the (Lord’s) Name, are Burnt as the jungle-fire burns down the bamboo
trees*,

He, who comes to the world, and indulges in Ego, is swept away, P, 64

The world is like the store- house of collyrium; in it the body and mind are blackened.

And they ant shine forth as Pure whom the Guru Saves, and who, through the Word, quench their
Fire. [7

Nanak : one Swims across with the True Name ; the Lord's Name is the King of kings.

Let me then not forget the Lord's Name; I have bought the Jewel of the Lord’s Name

The Egocentrics were drowned in the Sea in agony; while the God-wards Swam across the Sea (of
Existence). /8-J6]

1. fyare (fray) : (Sans. qurrq), fit. to ga to.

Haale Aa alee (seats wy atarq) : this truly (fa) is the lot (Alar) writ on the forehead.

gad (ge) : (Sans. gg ffx) : high mountain.

Lit, the Parent's home, ; :

amd (ated) : (Sans. atat) : thoray.

faa aq (faq ara) : faa (faa, Sams. wat, there) ; ata (of it).

niRTa (araTt) : (Sindhi), without consciousness.

fig u2 iQ Geel (firg of sire @ardt) : When the body (fifg) falls (2), the life (Fi) bath played out its

ope waus

play (ues).
9. fa@ afe war avg (fire afa cur ery) : as (fg) jungle fire (she) burns down (ear) the straw (aq,.

MEGA LEAPE EC SSBOBEHOSCGBOGBOCOBCOCOCCCEGRE SESS EOGCSSCCEOCESGRE

4
.9
3
‘<
(a
c
|

Page 108 | www.sikhbookelub.com
Sri Rag. M. 1

We have made (this world) our home ; but each day the anxiety to pass away increases.

Yea, it would be a true home only if it stayed. /J/

What kind of station is this world ?

Do thou then the Deeds of Faith, gather thou the Expense (for travel beyond), and call upon the
(Lord's) Name. [J-Pause] ,

The Yogi sits in postures; the Mullah has his own seat ;

The Pundit recites the Books ; the Siddha sits in the temple of gods. [2]

But the gods and the Siddhas, ‘the worshippers of Shiva, the heavenly musicians, the men of Silence, the
Sheikhs, the Pirs and men in command,

Have all left ; ; the others too are all awaiting their turn. [3]

Of the kings, the chiefs, the rich, the mighty, no one remains,

A brief moment or two, and then we pass away; O my mind, know thou, that thou must also leave. /4]

Prays Nanak :-—“The Word reveals this, but rare the one who knows

That only the Lord Pervades the earth, the walters and the interspace”, [5]

He is the Allah, Unknowable, Unfathomable, the Creator, the Cause, the Beneficent.

All the world comes and goes and only the Lord of Mercy stays. /6/

(True) Home is that over which? is not the writ (of death).

The skies and the earth will pass away; the One alone will remain. /7/

The sun and the day, the moon and the night, and myriads of stars wil! go.*

The Abode of the One alone always stays : hear thou, O man, for Nanak speaks the Truth. /8-17/

Sri Rag M. 3 Ashtpadis
By the Gruce of the One Supreme Being, the Hteenul, the Enlightener.

Through the Guru’s Grace one Dwells on the Lord’s Name : without the Guru, there is no Worship:

If the Guru Unites one with Himself, one Knows and becomes Pure,

The Lord is True, His Word is True and through the Word is our Union with God. [i]

© brother, why has the man without Faith come into the world ?

He Serves not the Perfect Guru, and wastes away his life in vain. /{1-Pause]

He, the Lord Himself’ is the Life of the world ; He Himself, in His Mercy, Unites one with Himself.

Who are these poor men? What at all can they say ?

He, whom the Lord grants Glory, him He Yokes to His Service. [2/

One sees one’s family and is enticed away by love, but it goes not with him.

Serving the True Guru, one gathers the Treasure of of Good ; beyond value is (the Lord's Treasure). P. 65

The Lord is my Friend ; for He alone is the Friend in the ‘end. (3]

In this world, (O Bride) which is thy Parent’s home, was also the Lord of Life, but being self-willed
(thou knew Him not, and) so lost thy Honour:

Without the True Guru, not one Knows the Path: the Blind have no Place to Rest.

He, in whose mind Dwells not the Lord, the Giver of Peace, passes away, regretful inthe end, [4]

If in ore parent’s home one Sees the Lord of Life, and through the Guru's Word gathers him in the
Min

And Meditates on Him night and day, one’s Ego and Lust depart.
And one becomes like unto Him wit ‘whom one is Imbued and one Merges in Truth and Truth alone.

He Himself i in His Grace Blesses with His Love, if one Dwel ls on the Guru's Word.

By serving the True Guru come Peace and Poise, and one’s Ego and Desire are stilled;

And, eternally does the Lord, the Giver of Good, the True, Abide in his mind, his heart, /6/

My Lord is Ever-Pure ; and the Pure mind alone Receives Him.

If the Treasure of the Lord’s Name comes into the mind, one sheds one’s Ego and Sorrow.

Through the True Guru, I Heard the Word ; Sacrifice am Ito the Guru. /7/

One may say one’s mind and heart are devoid of Ego, but without the Guru, one is rid not of it.

He, the Lord, is the Lover of Devotees and the Giver of Peace ; He in His Grace Comes into the mind.

Nanak : He alone Blesses us with an Awakened Consciousness ; and Himself Blesses us with Glory,
through the Guru. /$-J-J8/ rot aa not aA

Page 109.

1. . ffi (fafa) |: fir.-(Sindhi), head, :
2. wife (very) : (Sans. vam): fe. vanishes. _, ee

Guru-Granth Dabi
Sri Rag M. 3

They, who practise good deeds in Ego, the Yama's rod is over their heads.

They, who Serve the True Guru come up, and are in Communion with the Lord. [J]

© my mind, Dwell on the Lord's Name, through the Guru's Grace.

They, in whose Lot it was so Writ by God, they Merged in the Lord's Name through the Guru's
Instruction. / J-Pause}

Without the True Guru, one gets not Faith, and Loves not the (Lord’s) Name.

He gels not Peace even in dream; and sleeps and abides in Pain. /2/

If we crave and yearn for the Lord and utter Him too, our Destiny changes not,

But they who submit to His Will, wrapt in His Worship alone, are accepted at the Lord’s Door. /3/

The Guru makes us imbibe His Word with Love; but without His Grace we Receive it not.

If one waters! the poisonous plant with Nectar, it fruitions but in pbison. {4}

The Pure and True Servants Love the True Guru;

They Practise His Will and shed the Poison of Ego and Evil. /3/

Read one may the Smritis or the Shastras, but is one ever Delivered through the mind's efforts ?

If one meets with the Saints, one Practises the Guru's Word. /6/> “

The Lord's Name is the Nine Treasures; it is beyond limit and extent.

The God-wards alone are Beauteous on whom is the Lord's Grace, [7]

Nanak: the Giver is the One alone, there is no one other than Him,

(But), we know Him through the Guru's Grace; and we Receive Him through His Mercy. [8-2-/9]

Sri Rag M. 3

If the (Soul's) Bird sits on the Beauteous Tree (of the body), and pecks at (the Lord's) Truth with the
Guru’s Love (in the heart). P, 66

And in drinks the Essence of the Lord, his mind set in the great Peace, he wanders not out and afar,

He abides in his own Home, and Merges in the Lord's Name. [J]

O my mind, go thou the Guru's Way.

(For) if one walks in His Will, one abides in the Lord's Name, night and day. /1-Pause]

If the Bird sits on the Beauteous Tree and flies about in four directions,

The more he flies, the more agony he feels, stung (by Desire), and he Wails.

He finds not the Lord’s Place, nor pecks at the Ambrosial Fruit (of God), [2/

The Guru-wards are like God's Ever-green Tree and they Merge in the True One, the natural way.

The Three Modes (of man’s activity) are silenced, and one is in Communion with the Word.

The Nectar-fruit of the Lord is one,

And, He alone is its Giver. [3]

The Egocentrics dry up; they neither bear Fruit nor Shade.

They neither have a Home nor Station; what use is it to seek their company ?

They are cut down and burnt each day, for they know not the Word nor the Lord’s Name. [4]

Tn God's Will do we act; as are our deeds, so do we wander about;

In His Will do we See the Lord's Presence and go wherever He Bids.

By His Will He Comes into our minds; by His Will do we Merge in His Truth. /3/

The wretches, who know not the Lord’s Will, shall wander about in Doubt,

Their activity is led by their minds and they waste themselves thus away.

They gather not inner Peace, nor Love the Truth. /6/

The faces of the God-wards are Beauteous, for they Love the Guru,

Through True Worship, they Merge in Truth and at the True Door they are found True.

Their coming (into being) is Blessed, for they Save all their Kinsmen, /7/

All work in His Cirace; no one is outside its pale.

And as is the Grace of the True Lord, so does one become.

Says Nanak, “The Glory of the Lord’s Name is Received by His Grace alone’. /&-3-20]

Sri Rag M. 3

The Guru-wards Dwell upon the (Lord’s) Name, the self-wards know it not,

The Guru-wards ever have Pure Countenances, for in their minds is the One Lord alone.
They attain their Happiness the natural way, and so Merge in the Great Peace. [JI]

O brother, be thou the Slave of the Guru's Slaves :

The Guru’s Service is the Guru's Worship, but rare is one who attains to it. //-Pause]

1. steba (aera) + fit, to distribute; (in the present context, to water).

Guru-GCrmth Sahib 9999999999999999999999909999999999990202999990090

EEE BB aE Oot, SC®SCSCOCEGECECOOOC

Page 11
[ 62 ]

The (Lord's) Bride has her Spouse eternally to herself, if she walks in the Guru's Will.

To the Eternal, Immovable, Lord she attains, who neither dies nor goes.

If she Unites with the Word, she is Separated not from the Spouse and is ever'in the Lord's Embrace. [2]

The Lord js Immaculate, the Purest of the pure, but one attains to Him not without the Guru,

One knows not Him by reading the scriptures and is deluded by Illusion. :

Through the Guru's Instruction, one gets the Essence of the Lord and one’s tongue is ever replete
with the Lord's Name.

One sheds one’s love of Maya through the Guru's Word, the natural way.

Without the Word, the world is in Pain; and Maya eats up the Egocentric. _ P. 67

Through the Word do we Dwell upon the (Lord's) Name; and through the Word we Merge in (the
Lord's) Truth. [4/

The Siddhas too are lost in Maya, for they find not Poise the natural way.

Maya pervades the three worlds; many are those who cling to it.

Without the Guru, one is Delivered not, nor Maya's duality leaves (one’s mind). {5

What is Maya ? What actions are Maya ?

Maya is Where one is bound to Pain and Pleasure, and one acts m Ego,

Without the Word, one’s Doubt goes not, nor does one’s Ego depart. [6

Without Love, there is no Worship; without the Word, there is no Place to Rest.

With the Word do we still our Ego, and the illusion of Maya goes;

And we Receive the Pleasure of the Lord’s Name through the Guru, the natural way, [7/

Without the Guru, Virtue shines not forth; without Virtue there is no Worship. .

When the Lord, the Lover of the Devotees, comes into the mind, instantaneously is He Met.

Praise thou then thy Lord, O Nanak, through the Word; for through His Grace is He Received. /8-4-2I]

Sri Rag M. 3

Maya and Altachment are also God's creation; He Himself deludes us (through them).

The Egocentric does (pious) acts, but knows not the Lord and wastes his life away.

The Guru’s Word is the Light of the world; through His Grace it comes into our minds. {JJ

O my mind, meditate thou on the Name that brings Peace to thee.

Praise thou the Perfect Guru and attain to thy Lord the natural way. {/-Pause/

One's Doubt is cast away, and one’s fear goes, if one sets one’s mind on the Lord's Fect.

Through the Guru if one Practises the Word, the God comes into the mind.

We Merge in our real Self and the Angel of Death devours us not. [2]

Namdeva,the calico-printer,and Kabir, the weaver, attained Salvation through the True Guru,

They who Realise God through the Word, their caste-consciousness is obliterated.

Yea, what Men of Spirit utter, no ome can erase, /3/

Prehlada, the demon’s son, didn’t practise the way of works, nor austerities for he knew not Duality,

On meeting the True Guru, he became Pure, and day and night he uttered nothing but the (Lord's) Name.

He read the One Name alone and Realised it—he knew not the Other. [4]

The followers of six Shastras, the Yogis and the Sanyasins, are lost in Doubt without the Guru.

If they Serve the True Guru, they attain to the State of Bliss and in-gather the Lord in their minds.

They Love the True Word and their comings-and-goings cease. /5/

The Pundits read and discuss (what they read) threadbare, but without the Guru they are lost in Doubt,

Myriads of wombs they wander through, but without the Word they get not Release.

When they remember the Lord’s Name, they attain to the State (of Bliss), and the True Guru unites
them (with the Lord). /6/

From the Society of the Saints issues the Name of the Lord, if the True Guru is met with in Hr, Love.

J offer myself to him giving up my Ego, and walk in the Way of the True Guru.

I am a Sacrifice to the Guru who brings my mind into Communion with the Lord. (7,

He is the Brahmin who knows the Brahman, and ts Imbued with the Love of God.

The Lord abides so near, in the hearts of all, but rare are the God-wards who know.

Nanak: through the (Lord's) Name comes Glory and, through the Word, one Realises the bord’ 4 22]

5 —

Sri Rag M, 3
The whole creation craves for the .ate of Equipoise, but without the Guru, one finds it not.
The Pundits are tired of reading, also the diviners of future; (but) many are deluded by their garbs.
If we meet with the Guru, we attain tu “4e state of Poise, if the Lord in His Will is Merciful. [J]
O brother, there is no Poise without the u""
It issues out of the Word, and one finds one’s Lord, the True God. [J-Pause/

2222800 Guru-Granth Sahib
If the Lord's Praise comes out spontaneously, it is accepted, else it is all vain prattle,

Thus is all worship ; thus is all Love and Detachment,

In the State of Poise is utter Bliss and Peace, without it life is all vain. [2]

Spontaneously, then Praise thy Lord and enter inte the Silence of the Great Peace’.

Utter His Virtues ; and enter into Communion with thy Lord.

Through the Word Comes the Lord in the mind, and the tongue tastes the Reality of the Real. [3/

In the State of Poise, one kills? Death and takes to the Refuge of the True One.

Thus does the Lord's Name come into our minds and we do only what is Good and True.

Fortunate are they who find this State and are merged in tt. [4]

Where is Equipoise in Maya ? Maya abides in Duality.

The self-willed go the way of works and are burnt down by Ego.

Their comings and goings cease not, and they go the Round time and again. [5]

Living within the Three Modes, there is no Equipoise ; for, thus, one wanders in Doubt :

What shall one read, dwell upon or utter, when one is led astray by God?

{Enter thou) the Fourth State (of Bliss) and like the God-wards gather it in thy Skirt, [6]

The Name of God, the Unmanifest, is like the (nine) Treasures, one is Wise-in-God only through Equipoise.

The Virtuous are in His Praise and their True Repute is abroad.

Through Equipoise is the Strayer United (with the Lord) ; through the Word comes about our Union
with God). 7]

Without Equipoise is all Darkness of Maya and Lust.

Through Equipoise is one Wise in the True, Infinite? Word.

And the Guru-God, in His Mercy, Unites one with Himself. [&/

Through Equipoise is the Unseen Lord Seen, and the Light of the Formless and Fearless God (bums in
our hearts). ;

He is the Blea of all souls, and the One to Unite thy Light with His.

Praise then through the Perfect Word thy Lord, who is beyond end, beyond limit. [9]

The Wise-in-God have the Name as their Wealth and through Equipoise do they Trade (with Him).

Night and day, they reap the Profit of the Lord's Name whose Treasures are inexhaustible.

Nanak : when the Giver Gives, He never falls short (of the Gifts). {J0-6-23/

Sri Rag M, 3

Meeting with the Truce Guru, one goes not the Round again, and cease one’s re-births and re-deaths. P. 69

Through the Perfect Word comes all Knowledge and one Merges in the Name of God. [J]

O my mind, fix thy attention on the True Guru ;

And the Immaculate Name, ever-fresh*, will enter into thee of itself, {J-Pause]

O Lord, my God, take me into Thy Refuge ; as Thou Willest, so shall I be.

O man, through the Guru's Word docs one still one’s Ego, and Swims across the Sea of Existence. [2]

By great good fortune do we Receive the Lord's Name ; through the Guru's Wisdom enshrined in the
Word we become Beauteous.

The Lord, the Creator, of Himself comes to Dwell within our minds and one abides in Equipoise. /3]

The Evocentric Loves not the Word, and is Bound down by the Chains (of Desire) to take the Round.

Wander as he may through myriads of species, his life is wasted away, {4/

In the minds of the Devotees is Bliss, for they are Imbued with the Love of the True Word,

They, the Ever-pure, Sing the Lord's Praises, night and day, and Merge in the Lord's Name the natural
way. [3

Through the Guru does one recite the Nectar-Word, and one realises the Immanent® Lord.

Serving Him, and Meditating upon him, one becomes the Awakened One and one’s State then is
indescribable, [6]

Meditating on the True Master, through the Guru's Word, He, the Lord, Comes into our minds.

And, we are imbued for ever with the (Lord's) Truth; and in His Mercy, He Unites us (with Himself). [7]

He, of Himself Does and Makes others do ; some He Blesses by Awakening them out of their Sleep.:

And of Himself He Unites them (with Himself) ; Nanak : through the Word does one Merge in the Lord,
our God, /8-7-24)

Sri Rag M. 3

If we Serve the True Guru, our mind becomes stainless, and our body becomes Pure.

In our minds is Bliss and Eternal Peace, and the Unfathomable Deep is Met.

One sits in the Holy Society of the Saints and, through the True Name, attains the mind’s Peace. [J]

1. nota meio (aft aarfir) : In contradistinction to the Yogi's trance, which he brings about through Hatha
Yoga, the Sikh enters into the trance spontaneously by concentrating his mind on the Word.
2. feafane (faerfer) : Lit. to remove, to scare away.
3. neta onefa (gate anfz) : the Word being equated with God, it too, like God, is infinite.
4. sea (aaa) : lit. of fresh body.
5. »TSHay ater) : God as Spirit (Jodh Singh).
Gurv-Granth poet 92999999399999999999999999999999999909289 99990090"

Page 11
Page 113

[ 64 ]

my mind, Serve thy True Guru, without Doubt.
The Lord shall then Abide in thee, and not even a particle! of Dirt will stick to thee. /J~Pause]
Through the True Word comes honour, and the man of the Truth gets a True name.
I am a Sacrifice unto those who vanquish their Ego, and Realise their Lord,
The Egocentrics Knew not the Truth ; they found no Refuge. [2/
(But) he who feeds upon (the Lord's) Truth, wears Truth, and abides in Truth,
Whosoever Praises Truth, and Lives in the True Word,
And Realises the Immanent Lord, and, through the Guru's Instruction, resides in bis inner Self? (is
Blessed). [3/
He, who Sees the Truth and Utters it, His body and mind are Pure.
His Instruction is True, Truc is his Repute ;
They, who forgot the Lord’s Truth, were Grieved and Wailed on passing away. [4]
Why did they come into the world—they, who did not Serve the True Guru ?
At the Door of the Yama, they are Beaten up and no one listens to thei yee:
They wasted away this life and are born to die again and over
When I saw the world on Fire, J hastened to the Refuge of oun, &
Who instructed me in the Lord’s Truth, and living in the Discipline of Truth.
The True Guru is the Vessel ; through His Word do we Swim across the Sea of Existence. /6/
We wander through myriads (of species), but find not Deliverance without the True Guru.
Tired of reading are the Pundits and the men of Silence ; they lose Honour, being attached to Duality,
The Guru gave the Word : “Without the True Lord, there is no other". [7]
True is their dedication whom the True One Yokes to Himself, their deeds are eternally True.
They abide in their innerselves* and Live in the True Palace.
Nan: he Devotees are for ever in Peace, for they’ are Imbued with the (Lord’s) True Name.
[7-8

Sri Rag M. 5

When one is in utter distress and there is no one to support him,

And the adversaries gather-in’ upon him and (even) his kinsmen desert him ;

When all the props‘ have given way and all the hopes are lost,

If he then remembers the Lord, even the hot wind will touch him not. /J]

O Master, Thou art the Might of the meek,

O Thou, the Eternal One, the True, through the Guru's Word art Thou known. [J-Pause]
If one is weak and is afflicted by hunger and nakedness,

And has no money on him and no one is there to give him comfort,

No desire of his is fulfilled ; no work of his is accomplished,

If he, in his heart, remembers the Absolute Lord, he attains Eternal Rule. [2]

If one is full of anxious thoughts, and his body is attacked by disease,

And is involved’ in his household and suffers now pain, now pleasure ;

And he wanders about in the four continents, and no rest finds,

If he remembers the Lord in his heart, his body and mind are cooled. (3)

He, who is mastered by his lust and anger and attachment and the miser’s greed,
And commits the Four Sins? and is being so destroyed,

And he never gives his ears to the Books and the Poesy (of the soul),

If he remembers the Lord with all his heart, even for a twinkling of the eye, he is saved. [4/
If one utters’, with the mouth®, the Shastras, the Smritis, and the four Vedas,

And lives a great ascetic’s and a yogi's life, and bathes in the holy waters :

And does a dozen kinds of works and does worship after ablution,

If he is not in Love with the Lord, then, for sure he goes to Hell. [5]

Dominion over others, vast estates and overlordship and enjoyments of myriad kind:,
And beauteous gardens and the proud command that runs :

And indulgence in varjous kinds of colourful shows : (all these are vain).

For, if one r remembers no not the Lord in the heart, one gets the life of a serpent. /6/

1. uaa: (aia) ‘If it is from Sanskrit aei7, it would mean any part (nig), uster also means little or feeble like

the moth or a paper-kite which seems to be the meaning here.
amufe (frrate) ; Mit. the home (ujfg) of the Self (frm),

3. Bq (arg): he who pursu..s “other,

4. ameng (ares) : (Sans. arg), ome, support.

5. uBfems (wafear) ; Panjabi version ~“f the Urdu gig (surrounded).

6. Drinking, stealing of the gold, el mith +he guru's wife, killing the cow or the Brahmin.

7 (fart) : (from , Bives t ht to). But here it means mere utterance.

$. Hua (qerrre) =i} met | ie. has learnt by rote (or heart),

320 Guru-Granth Sabib
One may have vast riches, culture, glory, pious routine (of life),

And love of the purents. sons, brothers, friends,

And men in arms salute him sirring him meekly :

But if he remembers not the Lord in the heart. he suffers in the deeps of Hell. [7/

With a perfect body, free of disease or deformity, and a care-free life,

Unmindful of death, one revels in pleasures, night and day,

And does what one chooses without fear in the mind,

If such a one remembers not the Lord, he is given over to the Couriers of the Yama. [8/

But, He on whom is the Lord's Grace, he repairs to the Society of the Saints,
The more he goes there, the more is his Love of God.

For, of both worlds is He the Lord, there is no place other than His (to go to).
Says Nanak, through the Blessings of the True Guru,one Receives the True Name of the Lord.

[9=1-26]

P. 71

Sri Rag M. 5

I know not what pleases my Lord,
Seek thou the Way, O. my mind! //-Pause/
The contemplator practises contemplation,
And the wise work through wisdom ;
But rare is the one who Knows the ‘Lord... fi}:
The Vaishnava practises the (outer) discipline’,
. The yogi aspires for emancipation: .
The ascetic is attached to.asceticism. {2
The man of silence observes silence.
The Sanyasin (is-in renunciation), and the celibate (sticks to celibacy),
The stoic abides in dispassion.
The worship of the worshippers is of nine kinds ;
The Pundits read aloud the Vedas ;
The householder is involved with his household, /4/
The chameleon-faced ones", and those who utter but one word’, and the;maked one
The robed ones®, the showmen* and those that keep awake’,
And others who bathe in the holy waters, [3/
The fasting ones, and those that do not touch others,
And the recluses whom no one can see,
And those wise in theirown minds: /6/
No one says he is lesser (than the others),
And all declare : “We've found, we've found",
But he alone is the Devotee whom the Lord Unites of Himself (with Himself). /7/
Nanak has abandoned all effort, all argument,
And sought the Refuge of the Lord,
And so he surrenders himself to the Feet of his God. /8-2-27/]

iu the Grace of the One Supreme Deing, the Eternal, the Enlightener.
Sri Rag M, 1
Thou art a Yogi amongst Yogis ; a reveller amongst the revellers.

O Dear, Thy limits are known to no one in heavens, the world or the underworld, [J]

Sacrifice am | to Thee and to Thy Name. /{J-Pause]
Thou created the world and assigned tasks to ui all : ; ;
Thou See-est Thy own creation. in nature, casting the dice. as it pleaseth Thee. 2}

1. gases) gos wars" (wradt wat arm) : he who worships the Bhagvat (2x91), i¢., a Vaishnava observes the
discipline ((qaaz") of his sect.
2, ggalu (agefa) : (Sans,) he who often changes his form (au).
3. fea Agel (ee qagt): the mendicant who utters bur one word like “Alaki", ete,
4. seus! (9tgar) :,,(Sans,) lit, he who has shaken off his sins, a sannyasin, usually remaining nude.
5. anys (arrest) : he who wears, like a Jangam, a gown of bells or the robes which he never discards.
: 6. a@3 (Fg) : he who performs a miraculous show (@3a); the showman.
7. saat (arqar) : he.who remains awake (anz!).

Guru-Granth Salib OVEQ22¢ 209
Page 114. wo _
[ 66 ]

Thou art immanent in the world'all crave for Thy Name,
Without the Truc Guru, Thou art found not, and all are enticed away by the lure of Maya. [3]
I am a Sacrifice unto the True Guru,

Meeting whom one reaches the Highest State (of Bliss), ;
And who makes us Realise our Lord whom seek the men of silence, and al) the angelic men of Som iat

What kind is the Society of the Saints ? Where utter they the Name of the One alone. _

For, the Lord's Will is in the (Lord's) Name and, through the True Guru, one Realises it all. /5)

This world is led astray by Doubt,

But who hath strayed it thus away, if not Thou ? : ges ee

And so the one Deserted is in great agony, for Thy Name is notin his Lot. /6/

‘What marks.off the Deserted women ?

The poor wretches are without their Spouse,

Their Wear is soiled and their Night passes in Agony. [7/

What Deeds does the loved Bride do,

That she receives what is Writ in her Lot by God ?

And on her is the Grace of the Lord and of Himself He Unites her (with Himself)? /&)

They who are Destined to obey the Lord's Will,

And who give place in their hearts to the Word, .

Such my mates are the True Brides, for they Love their Lord. [97

They who were pleased with His Will,

Purged themselves of the Doubt,

Nanak : the True Guru is he who Unites all (with the Lord).  //0/

On Mecting the True Guru one Receives the Fruit.

If one drives the Ego out of oneself,

The Pain of an Evil mind is not his, and lo, his Lot shines forth. f7JJ

Nectar-sweet js the Lord’s Word,

Filling the Devotees’ hearts.

If we cherish in ourselves the Peace-giving Service (of the Lord),

He Blesses us with His Grace and Saves us. [/2]

True is the Meeting with the True Guru,

If through him, one recites the Name (of the Lord).

Without the True Guru, no one has found Thee, O Lord ; all are tired of the (way of) works. /J3]

Lam a Sacrifice unto the True Guru,

Who has shown the Path to the one strayed ;

And He the Lord is in His Grace, and He Merges us (into His Being), [7/4]

Thou art immanent in all, O Lord,

Yea, Thou the Creator, (though) hid (from the eye).

Nanak : through the Guru art Thou Revealed to him who is open to Thy Light. //5/

The Master of Himself Grants Glory ;

And blesses us with the body and the soul :

He Saves the Honour of His Servants, keeping both His Hands on their foreheads. (76)

Rises then the Devotee above ritual, above the domain of mind,

And is awake to the Knowledge that the Lord Knows all.

He is Acclaimed all over ; his Glory is manifest to all. //7/

Lo, the Lord minded not my merit, demerit, and as is the nature* of His Self,

He Embraced me to-His Bosom,

And now even the hot winds touch me not. //8/

I have Dwelt on the Lord, body and soul,

And the Desire of my mind is fulfilled.

Thou, the King of kings, my Master, art over my head ; (says) Nanak, ‘I live by Dwelling on Thy
Name. //0/

Thou of Thyself hast created (all), :

Through Thee also is the Play of Maya; P. 73

Yea, all art Thou, the True One ; but he alone knows Thee on whom is Thy Grace. [20]

By the Guru's Grice I Received Thee,

And I shed my craze for Maya ;

And, by Thy Grace, Thou Gatherest me in Thyself." /2/]

1. yond (argrt) : (Sans. gear) : expanse, hence, the world.
2. faae (fitz) : (Arabic), routine ; Royal Title (Kapur Singh),

220 Guru-Granth Sahib

Page 11

Thou, O Lord, art the Gopis ; Thou the (Yamuna) river, Thou art the Krishna, the herdsman.

Thou Thyself Supportest the earth’,
By Thy Will are created ali the human vessels, and Thou of Thyself Embellishest and Breakest them
all. /22/

He, whose mind is set on the True Guru,

Purges himself of Duality.

Pure, O Pure, burns the Light in such beings,

(For) their life has borne the Fruit (of Life); /23]

Thou art the Lord of Beneficence,

And so, | Praise Thee, night and day,

(For), Thou Grantest Thy Gifts unasked ; And so Nanak gathers Thy Truth, O dear Lord! [24-/]
Sri Rag M. 5

1 fall at my Lord's Feet and thus is He reconciled to me.

The True Guru has United me with the Purwsha of whom there is no equal. /J-Pause

Sweet, O Sweet is my Master*,

Sweeter than the mother, the father’,

Than brothers and sisters and mates ;

Not another is as sweet as is He. [J }

In Thy Will, O Lord, came Savan, the month of rains,

And J Ploughed my Field over with (T hy) Truth ;

And 1 Sowed Thy Name with Faith, an gathered a Rich Harvest by Thy Grace. [2]

Meeting with the Guru, T Realised the One,

And (now) know not to write the name of another,

The Lord has assigned to me the only Task,

And I perform it as He Orduins. /3/

O brothers, Enjoy ye this Gift (of God).

At the Guru’s Court, I have been endowed with a Robe (of Honour),

And, I have become a Leader of the Village.

And have Bound down the Five Rivals. f4/ “

] have sought Thy Refuge’, O King, ; ‘a

That oui of the Five’ Peasants in my Tenancy

Not one can raise his head (against me)*,

And abundance flows through the Village. {3/

Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I] to Thee, My Lord,

Breathlessly, I meditate on Thee.

For, Thou hast Peopled my Ruin (with Good),

Sacrifice am J unto Thee. /é/

My dear Lord, Thee I worship each day,

And gather the Fruit of my heart's desire,

And all my works are accomplished,

And my mind’s Hunger is satiated. /7/

I have forsaken all my involvements,

And I Dwell upon the True Lord alone,

And T hold fast in my Skirt the Lord's Name,

Which to me is as the Nine Treasures. /8/

I've gathered now the Essence of Peace.

(For), in my inmost Self is the Guru’s Word,

The Truc Guru has made me Realise my Spouse

By blessing my Forehead with his Hands. [9]

T have built up the Abode of (the Lord's) Truth,

And gathered in it the Worshippers after a great search :

I wash their Feet, and wave the fan over them,

And fall humbly at their Feet, O dear! 10) —

1. dife (arg): (From Sans. 71), earth,
2. Gmvel fuag feast (tere fren seqr) : my (feist, from Sindhi wfgja) Master of the carth (ai-rre) is desirable

fezsr, from Sans. yer)
3. si ha ago fkeat (wa wa arag fast): sweeter (fist) than (ureg) mother (nfy from Arabic Qy) and

father (nigt, as im Arabic),
4. An] (ard) == mam : refuge.

5. That is, the five desires.
6. a6 del afe a awel (wq tt fe x gud): 1 no ont can (gel a “Suna 4c. Feet) raise (afte) his head (45

fit, shoulder). } :

Guru-Granth Sahib 9999999999999999999929222999999999992229999999%

Page 116
As I heard of Him, I called on the Guru, 4
And he made me wise in the (Lord's) Name, and in (True) Charity, and Piety. P. 74
The whole world is thus Saved, being Rowed across in the True Boat. [JJ//
The whole universe is eternally Thy Worshipper, O Lord,
For, Thou Givest ear to all our prayers.
I have tested all, and found that no onc bul Thou alone Savest us by Thy Grace. [12]
The Merciful Lord has now given the Command,
That no one will domineer over and give pain’ to another,
And, all will abide in Peace.
Such, O dear, is the Rule of my Compassionate God. {73/
The Lord's Nectar drips imperceptibly (into my heart),
And | now speak as is the Will of the Lord.
I have wholly leaned on Thee, my Master,
And Thou hast accepted me (as Thy own), [14
Thy Devotees Hunger but only for Thee.
© Lord, fulfil my Desire,
~Q Thou Giver of Peace, Bless me with Thy Vision,
And take me into Thy Embrace, [J5]
Ihave found not another like Thee, O Lord,
For Thow art in all lands, worlds and the underworlds. |
Thou art in all Places, in the spaces, and-in the interspace art Thou,
(Says) Nanak, ‘‘Thy Devotees, O Lord, lean on no one but Thee”, [16]
lam the Warrior of God..
Meeting with the Guru, the Plume of my Headgear flutters.
The Audience has assembled
And,-lo, the Creator? Himself Watches me (wrestle), [17]
The Bugles shrick, the Drums are beat ;
Thé Wrestlers have entered into the Tourney, and circle about,
«See, how the Five Furies I trounce and humble’,
For the Guru's Hand is at my back, [/8/
All of (us men) came together,
But we all go back to our Home through different Ways.
‘The God-wards reap the Profit of God, while the self-willed lose even the Stock (of their Life). [79/
« Thou, O God, art beyond colour, beyond signs,
And yet Thy Presence is so Manifest, Q Dear.
They, who hear of Thee, call on Thee,
Thy Devotees, are Imbued with Thee, O Thou, the Treasure of All-Good. [20]
I Serve Thee, my Master, eternally and for ever.
‘The Guru has cut the Fetters (off my feet).
“And 1 will not play another turn in the Ring.
(For); r ve found in this. very life the opportunity (for my Deliverance). [2J-2-29/

“By the Grace’ of the One Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Enlightener_
Sri Rag Pahre; M. 1

In the First Watch of the Night, you are cast into the womb, O my Merchant-friend*,
On your head (you stand) and do penance and pray to your Lord.

Yea, pray you to your Lord, your mind fixed on Him,

And then, naked' are you delivered (into the world) and naked again pass out of it,
As is ‘Writ on the Forehead, so is the working of one’s soul.

Says Nanak : life in the First Watch, is cast into the womb by His Will. [1]

In the Second Watch of the Night, O my Merchant-friend, you forget your Lord, P, 75
From hand to hand you are danced about, as Yashodha did to Krishna.

Yea, one is fondled and danced about, and the fond mother says, “This is my son”.
But, O my ignorant, unconscious mind, in the end no one is thine.

You know not Him who Created the Creation, nor gather Wisdom in thyself,

Says Nanak, “In the Second Watch of the Night, one forgets (one's Lord)” [2)

“Lo aere (rarer) = = gn fer : pains,
_ 2. Ba (eq) = te : Gad.

3. fad ( A): (Sans, faga), floored.

4. This is just a refrain and should not be taken literally.

§. amaana (arroatg) ; without (37) waqre (customary sign or garb).

3390 Guru-Graath Saubib

Page 117 sy - www.sikhbookclub:com
In the Third Watch of the Night, your Mind is fixed on beauty and riches, O my Merchant-friend,
You remember not the Lord's Name, through which one is delivered of his Bondage,

Remember not you your Lord's Name, and lose your head, lured! by Maya:

And, revelling in thy riches and enjoying the beauties (of the earth) is your life wasted away?.

You keep not your Faith, nor your rendezvous with the (Holy) Deeds,

(For), says Nanak, “In the Third Watch of the Night, your mind is fixed on beauty and riches.” (3)
In the Fourth Watch of the Night, thy Crop ts sheared?, O my Merchant-friend,

When the Yama drives you along, no one knows the mystery (of whither you are led) ”

The Lord's Mystery no one knows, when the Yama drives thee along :

False then is all the wailing over your loss and in an instant you become an alien.

(But), You Receive only what you had craved all your life.

Says Nanak, “In the Fourth Watch one’s Crop is put to the Scythe’. /4-J/]

Sri Rag M. 1

In the First Watch of the Night, your child-mind is unconscious, O my Merchant-friend,
You suck milk and are fondled, and your mother and father love you for you are their son;
Your father and mother love you, their son, immensely, but all attachment is Maya.
You come (into the world) by greal good fortune, and get the Fruit of what you had earned in the past
and now you do deeds for the future.
(But) without the Lord’s Name, vou are Saved not and are Drowned for your love of Duality.
Says Nanak, “Man gets Deliverance in the First Watch (only) by Dwelling on his God". [11]
In the Second Watch of the Night, you are intoxicated by the Wine of ripe beauty, O my friend !
Night and day, you indulge, and are blind to the Name of the Lord,
All other tastes taste sweet to you but the Lord's Name is not in your heart.
You gather not Wisdom, nor the art of concentration, nor continence, and so is your life wasted away.
By visiting the holy places, by fasting and cleansing (the body) and performing the acts of piety or the
way of works (one is emancipated nol).
The Deliverance, Nanak, is in the Loving Adoration of God, and all else leads to Duality. {2
In the Third Watch of the Night, OQ my Merchant-friend, the (white) Swans (of hair) descend on the
Pool (of your head).
Your youth wears out, and age is the winner and your days prow less and less.
And then, at the end, you grieve, when the Yama drives you on blind-fold; P. 76
You kept all your goods to yourself as your own, but in an instant they were all alien to you.
Your intellect left you,your wisdom departed, and you repented for your evil deeds, : ,
Says Nanak, “Fix your mind on the Lord, in the Third Watch of the Night.” /3]
In the Fourth Watch of the Night, you get old and your body is shattered.
Blind-fold, you see nothing, nor your ears hear :
Your tongue loses its taste; lost are your activity and power*.
How can he, who-has no Virtue, get Peace; the self-willed is born only to die.
When the life? is ripe, it breaks with a click®, and is destroyed; how can then one be proud of mere
coming-and-going ?
Says Nanak, “In the Fourth Watch of the Night, know you the Word through the Guru’. 4]
And last comes ihe end of the breath, O my Merchant-friend, for your shoulders’? are weighted down
by cruel old age.
Not an iota of Good came into you, O'my Merchant-friend, and Bound down by Evil, you are driven "oa
alone. . : :
(But) he, who foes the Way ‘of Good and Continence is hurt not and cease his comings-and-goings.
Neither Death, nor Maya's snare is for him; for he Swims across {the Sea of Fear) with Love and
evotion.
He goes with Honour, is Merged in the Great Peace, and all his Woes depart.
Says Nanak, “Man is Saved by Truth and through Truth does he receive Honour.” f5-2]

1. “faa (fang): (Sans. arnge), fit. agitated, excited.
2. alge (afgart) : (Sans. apar, uselessly), also priceless,
3. ere] (arat) : (From Sans, ara), to pluck or cut.
4. ao uaafarat (x8 TerEgATT) + lost (a3) are (ugaG, Sans. tuRR, activity) and grat (gz, power)
5. ue (arg) : fit, crop.
6. afs (gfx) : fit. to wither away ; also to break with a click (aa).
1. aie #fa = at, aa: shoulder.

Page 118 , www. v.sikhbookclub. com
Page 119

[ 70 ]

Sri Rag M, 4

In the First Watch of the Night, you were cast into the womb, O my Merchant-friend,

Uttered you then His Name and Meditated on Him and gathered-in the Name of the Lord, .

And so, by calling on Him you were saved in the Fire (of the Womb).

When came you out, your father and mother saw your face and were pleased,

Remember Him, therefore, of whom you were created; Dwell upon His thought in your heart, by the

Guru's Grace.

Says Nanak, “Remember the Lord in the First Watch of the Night, by God's Grace.” [Jj

In the Second Watch of the Night, O my Merchant-friend, your mind is fixed on Duality.

Your mother and father hug you and bring you up saying : ‘he’s mine, he’s mine’.

They embrace you and wish that you earned for them.

Lo, the ignorant fool-knows not the Giver and clings to the Gift.

Rare is the one who turns his face God-wards and reflects and fixes his mind eternally on the Lord:

“Him,” says Nanak, “Death eats not in the Second Watch of the Night.” /2/

In the Third Watch of the Night, OQ my Merchant-friend, the mind is involved in the household.

One thinks of riches, and gatheres riches, but gathers not the Lord (in one’s mind).

Never, never, does he gather-in the Lord's Namé; who is his only Support in the end;

All this wealth is Maya, the Great Illusion, and one leaves it all in the end, in sorrow, P.77

He, on whom is God’s Grace, Meets with the Guru, and gathers-in the Lord's Name :

Says Nanak, “He, in the Third Watch of the Night, Meets with his Lord, the God.’ /[3/

In the Fourth Watch of the Night, O my Merchant-friend, the Lord brings about! the time of your leaving.

Serve now your True Guru, for the whole Night is going to pass away.

Serve your Lord every moment and tarry nol, that you become Eternal through the ages.

Enjoy your Spouse and do away with the pain of births and deaths.

Know no difference between the True Guru and the (True) God, the Master, Meeting whom one is
' Pleased with the Lord's Worship.

Says Nanak, “In the Fourth Watch, blessed is the Devotee’s Night". {4-J-3/

Sri Rag M. 5

In the First Watch of the Night, OQ my Merchant-friend, you were cast into the womb,

In ten months you were made a human being and given life to practise Virtue,

To practise Virtue you received-your Jife, as was the Eternal Writ for you;

With your mother, father, brother, son and wife, your Lord united you,

And you did virtuous deeds as God Willed, for, in the hands of the beings lies nothing.

Says Nanak, “In the First Watch, the Lord cast you into the womb.” [J

In the Second Watch of the Night, Q my Merchant-friend, the (desires of) full-blooded youth rose
within you like sea-waves,

You then distinguished not between Good and Evil, and your mind was intoxicated with Ego.

You distinguished not between Good and Evil, while the Way ahead was hard.

You Served not the True Guru, while over your head stood® the Yama like mad:

O fool, when the Dharmaraja seizes (and questions) you how shall you answer him ?

Says Nanak; “he Second Watch of the Night your full-blooded youth was to you like the sea-
waves”. ;

In the Third Watch of the Night, O my Merchant-friend, you gather Poison in your blind Ignorance.

You are enticed by the love of your son and wife, and within you rises the tide of Avarice.

How-can you remember your Lord, lured by Desire ?

You kept not Society with the Holy and you suffered Pain, birth after birth.

You forgot the Creator : and even for a moment remembered Him not.

Says Nanak, “In the Third Watch, you gather Poison in blind Ignorance”, /3/

In the Fourth Watch of the Night, O my Merchant-friend, the Day (of death) comes near,

Gather-in the Lord’s Name that may keep you company in the Lord's Court,

Through the Guru, gather-in the Name, that may be your Succour in the énd.

This craze for Maya goes not with you—False is its love. . ;

All your Dark Night is past® : Serve,therefore, the True Guru that Light may dawn (upon you), P. 78

Says Nanak, “In the Fourth Watch, the Day (of death) comes near”. [4] ; ; ,

As was the Writ of the Lord, away you went with all your deeds;

The Couriers of Death caught hold of you with a firm grip and gave you no time to wait;

As was the Writ, so did they drive you along; the self-willed were ever in Grief.

1. ame} (ard) ter : brougnt about. ‘The word is so inflexed to suit the rhyme-scheme,
2. Brg (21d) : standing; alsa cool (far), .
3. geal (quit) =azel : passed

Gort-Granth Suhi
But they, who Served their True Guru, were at all times in Peace at the Lord's Court,
The body is the field of Karma in this age : whatever one sows that one reaps.
Says Nanak, “The Devotees are ever in Bliss at the Lord's Court, while the self-willed (agam) take to

the Round”, /5-/-4/

Sri Rag M. 4, Chhant
Mo the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Hulightener.

How can the Ignorant Bride see her Lord's Face at her Mother's Home ?

(Only if) the Lord, in His Grace, make her learn the Duties of her Spouse’s Home, through the Guru.

If she leurns the Duties of her Spouse’s Home through the Guru, she will Dwell ever upon her Lord.

She will be Happy amidst her Mates and, at the Lord’s Court wave her arms about (in joy).

Dwelling on the Lord’s Name, she strikes? the account and the balance off the Dharmaraja’s (Book).

Through the Guru does thus the Ignorant Bride see the Face of her Lord at her Mother's Home. [JJ

O my father, lam Wedded to my Lord, by the Guru's Grace.

The Darkness of my Ignorance has vanished ; the Guru has blazed the trail of Wisdom,

Blazes the tratl of Wisdom and dispelled is my Darkness and T find my Lord, the Jewel of jewels.

Gone are my Ego and Sorrow, and, through the Guru's Instruction, my Self eats up my self.

J] Marry the Being Eternal, Immortal, who dies not, nor goes,

Such is my Marriage, O father, to my Lord, by the Guru's Grace. [2]

True is my Lord, O my father ; the Marriage-party is of the Holy Servants of the Lord ;

At my Mother's, | was Happy Dwelling on my Lord, and at my Spouse's, I look Beauteous.

She, who Dwelt on the Lord's Name at her Parent's Home was Happy at the Groom's too.

And they, who Conquered their mind, by the Guru's Grace, Won ( at the Chess-board of Life) ; Blessed,
Blessed, are they.

On Meeting the Saints, the Marriage was well performed and I got the Lord of Bliss as my Spouse.

True, true is my Lord, O my father : Accompanied by the Lord's Servants, the Marriage-party looks
Béuuteous. /3/

O my father, gift away to me the Dowry of the Lord's Name. P. 79

Let the Lord be my Wear, His Glory my Beauty, that my Task be accomplished.

Blessed is the Lord's Worship ; the True Guru has blessed me with it.

Jn all lands, nay, in all Universe Pervades the Glory of the Lord; the Gift of the Lord's (Name) is
matchless : .

All other Dowry displayed by the self-willed is false egoism and a vain show,

O my father, bless me with the Dowry of the Lord’s Name. [4/

The Lord Pervades all, O my father : Meeting with the Spouse, the Bride (’s family) grows like a Creeper’.

Throvgh ages upon ages, through all time, through eternity, the Guru’s Family increases manifold ;

The namly of the True Guru runs through all the Ages ; by the Guru's Grace, they all Dwell upon the

aliTic.

The Lord never goes nor dies and Gives more and for ever more.

Nanak : He the Lord is the Saint of saints, Dwell thou on Him and be Blest

O my father, on meeting her Lord, who Pervades all, the Bride (‘s family) grows like a Creeper. [5-I]

“ Sri Rag M. 5, Chhant
Gy the Grare of the One Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Hnlightener.

O my mind, my friend, gather-in the Lord's Name.

O my mind, my friend, thy Lord lasts with thee.

Dwell an the Name, thy eternal Support ; he, who does it, is never wasted away :

The Desires of his heart are fulfilled by fixing his mind on the Lotus-Feet (of the Lord).

The flower-girt Lord, whe Pervades ithe seas and the earth, also Abides, by His Grace, within thee,
Says Nanak, “© my. beloved mind, T ask thee to dispel thy Doubt in the Society of the Saints”, [J]
O my mind, my friend, without the Lord, all the show is false. ‘

O my mind, my friend, the world is a Sea of Poison.

Make the Lotus-Feet (of the Lord) thy Boat and so shed thy Sorrow and Doubt,

And Meet thy Perfect Guru, by good Fortune, and Dwell on thy Lord, night and day,

He, the Master, who is since Eternity, His Name is the Mainstay of the Devotees.

Says Nanak, “O my beloved mind, without the Lord, all show is false". /2]

I. fray (fem) (Sans. 9) toil land ; also, to weed oul; tofurrow. Here, to strike off the account as the

plough upturns the earth.
"2° Se ede) (fa aedt) : this idiom is always employed to denote increase in progeny, here it means the growth

in the worshippers of the Lord.

“Guru-Granth Sali 99099299999999999999922299999999929922029999990994

PIAECEC COGSOCOSSECCSOPOCOCOPOOCHPOEECEEELE PEGE HE OSSOC UC SOSSSOBESSHESIGE

Page 12
Page 121

O my mind, my friend, carry along the Profitable Merchandise’.

O my mind, my friend, thus does one Dwell in the Abode of the Eternal. ity

He who Serves at the Door of the Unknowable, Unfathomable God, attains eternal Peace,

He comes nor goes and is not born (merely) to die, and his Sorrows and Doubts depart.

The Account of the conscious-unconscious (mind) is torn up for him, and the Couriers of Death are
helpless (before him). .

Says Nanak, “‘O my beloved mind, garry the Profitable Merchandise’ along into the Yond". /3/

O my mind, my friend, abide in the Society of the Saints,

O my mind, my friend, the Lord’s Name is the Light of the world.

Call on thy Master, of easy access, who fulfils all thy Desires ; P. 80

And practise what is in thy Wril, and attain to thy Lord ; Separated for long, thou art United (to Him).

Thy mind regains its Faith in Him who Pervades within (thee) and without.

Says Nanak, “O my beloved mind, abide thou in the Society of the Saints.” (4/

Omy mind, my friend, devote thyself to thy Lord, Imbued with Love.

O my mind, my friend, the mind’s fish lives only.in the Lord's Waters.

Drink thy Lord's Nectar:Word, and be sated ; and Peace will rain upon thee,

Altain to Thy Lord*® and Sing in Joy : the True Guru being ever in Mercy, thy Desire is fulfilled.

‘He ties thee to His Skirt and blesses thee with the Nine Treasures ; and the Master bestows upon thee

His Name which is all-in-all*.

Says Nanak, “‘ Through the Saints’ Instruction, thy mind is Imbued with the Loving Adoration of the
Lord.” {5-J-2)

Chhants' of Sri Rag, M. 5

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Huligitener.
Dakhnoa! :
In my heart is my Lord, how shall I See His Presence® ?

Nanak : seek thou the Refuge of the Saints, and thus find the Life of all life. [7]
Chhant :

“Love of the (Lord’s) Lotus-Feet in the mind’ : this is the Saints’ Way.

Love of Duality is worthless and agajnst their Way ; the Lord's Servants like it not.
Nothing do His Servants like, save being in the Lord's Presence,

And find not Peace for a moment (without Him).

Without the Lord’s Name, the body and mind aré empty, and die like fish out of water.
Meet me Thou, O Life of my life, that I Sing Thy Praises in the Society of Saints.

© Master of Nanak, take pity and permeate Thou his body and mind.

Dakbna :

He, the Lord, shines forth at all places ; I see not another.
All the doors’ are opened unto us, Nanak, as we See the God.
Chhant +

Indescribable is Thy Word, the Mainstay of the Saints ; reflect, O mind, on Him through the Word :
With every breath and intake of food, remember thou Him in the mind, with perfect Faith.

Why forget Him from the mind even for a moment, who is all Virtue and the Life of our life.

He, who Fulfils our Desire, and Knows the Sorrow of our hearts ;

He, who is the Support of the supportless and the Friend of all, meditate thou on Him that thou losest
not Him in a Gamble.

Prays Nanak : “O Lord, have Thy Mercy and make me Swim across the Sea of Existence.” {2}
Dakhna :

1 bathe in the Dust of the Saints’ (Feet), when my Master is Pleased with me.
I find all Riches, Nanak, when I find the Lord’s Name.

Su (Bra): (Sindhi), merchandise.
» Fitog (shee) : He who is the support (ua) of Lakshmi (Al), fe. , God.

3... Ween (Wey) ¢ (Sans. qfer), the whole (treasure). It is also rendered as Feq-an, /¢., the essence of all rasar
or flavours.

4. ga (wa): (Sans. oe) iit. yerse, here a typical measure.

§. In these verses, Sindhi and Lehndi (Western and Southern Punjabi) terms are commonly employed; hence
the composition is called Dakhne (which contain Southe

rn
Sais vera oF Realy ue fad chara (qe ag rr Ge, ck Pew Mere) : 05 Cheart) ien@ ila), a0. rf (ony love), uA
(see)—are-all Sindhi words.

7. are (ware) : (Sans. ware) : door i the Teath door,

220 Guru-Granth Sabib
The Master’ s Abode is Beautéous, in it.abide the Devotees: this is their only Hope.
Their minds and bodies are imbued with’ the Lord's Name, and they Drink the Nectar (all the time).
P, 31

Lord's Nectar they drink and become Eternal; the poisonous brackish Water they touch not.

When my Lord, the Supporter of the earth, is Pleased, I look upon the Society of the Saints as the (nine)
Treasures,

(Thus) one attains all Peace. all-Joy, O dear; and one sews into one's mind the Jewel (which is the Lord);

Forget not Him, therefore, ever the Life of thy life, and live thou (eternally) by Dwelling on Him. /3/

Dakbna :

He, whom Thou Ownest, Thou Meetest, O Lord !
For, Thou art enticed away by hearing (from him) Thy own Praise. {7}

Chhant :

With the potion of Love (in their mouth), the Devotees. bewitched their Lord,

By the Grace of the Saints, they looked Beauteous in the Lord’s Embrace.

They looked Beauteous in His Embrace, and shed all their Pain, and brought, through Worship, their
Lord into their power.

Upon their mind rained all Joy; the Lord was munificent and they shed their Woes of life and death.

Their Mates sang the’Song of Bliss and were Fulfilled and were trapped not by Maya any more.

The Loving Lord Gave them His Hand, and the Sea of Existence dreaded them not, [{4/

Dakhna :

The Name is beyond Value; not one knows its Worth :
They, in whose Lot it is so Writ, they alone Enjoy the Love of the Lord. [/]

Chhant ;

They, who speak and write and hear of the Lord, become Pure and Blessed and they Save their Kins.

They, who kept the Society of the Saints, Loved the Lord's Name, and Dwelt upon the Lord.

They Dwelt upon the Lord and Fulfilled their lives; upon them was the Lord's perfect Mercy.

He took them by the hand and Blest them with His Praise, and they were not cast into the womb again
to die.

When the True Guru was in Mercy, I Met the Lord, and stilled my Lust and Anger and Greed.

How can I describe the Indescribable Lord ? 3
Says Nanak, “I can only be a Sacrifice unto Him". [5-]-3]

CPLOCOEECOEECOEOaE:

By the Grace of the One Supreme Betng, the Hternal, the Hulightener.
‘Sri Rag M. 4, Vanjara?

Glorious is the Lord's Name who Creates all;

And, Supports all, and Pervades all hearts, all over.

Meditate on Him, for there is no one other than Him.

They, who fix their minds on the love of Maya, have to leave it in the end, and so they Grieve.
Nanak : the Lord’s Servant Dwells upon the Name which is his Mainstay in the end. {J}

I have no one but Thee, O Lord !
In the Refuge of the Guru, I find my Lord, O my Merchant-friend; (but) He is Met with if it be in one’s
great good Fortune, {/-Pavse]} ;
0 brothers, without the Saints no one has attained the Lord's Name. . Pp & .
They, who do deeds in Ego, are like a harlot’s son, withoutaname. a.
One is of one’s Father's caste if the Guru, in his Mercy, Blesses. ‘ abs go
With great good Fortune, one finds the Guru, and night and day one is in Love with the Lord. me
Nanak, the (Lord's) Servant has Realised his Lord, for he did the only Deed of Praising the God. . [2].

In my mind is the Love of the Lord. .
The Perfect Guru has. made me Wise in the Lord's Name. [f- Pause]

Meditate on the Lord's Name so long as thou hast life and beauty.
He alone will go along. with thee in the end, and Save thee when thy life is no more,

Sacrifice am] unto those in whose heart Dwells the Lord.

Ae. mess (weer) : (Persian), imbued with.
3 A folk-tune, .

: of

§ sswaececeeos OSOSESE

bil
L
Ui
‘

Page 122, -www.sikhbod&elub.com
[ 74]

They, who remembered not the Lord’s Name, regretfully did they leave the world,

In whose Lot it was so Writ by God, they alone, Nanak, Dwelt on the Lord's Name. [3/

O my mind, fix thy attention on the Lord's Love. . ;

With great good Fortune, one finds the Guru, and through the Guru's Word one is Ferried across (the
Sea of Existence). , {/-Pause]

He of Himself Creates and Gives and Takes.

Of Himself does the Lord lead one astray; of Himself He makes us all Wise.

The minds of the God-wards are Illumined; but rare, how rare, are they !

Sacrifice am I unto those who Found the Lord, through the Guru’s Word.

Nanak’s Lotus has Blossomed forth and into his mind has come Lord, the God. [4]

O my mind, Reflect on thy Lord.

And, seek the Refuge of the Guru, and all the Woes and Sins of thy life leave thee. [1-Pawse]

The Lord Pervades all hearts, but which way! to seek him out ?

By Meeting the Perfect Guru, the Lord Comes into thy mind.

My only support is the Lord's Name; by the Lord's Name is the mind Illumined and the Highest State
(attained).

The Lord's Name is my only Hope; from His Name is my Caste and Honour.

Nanak, the Lord's Servant, has Dwelt upon the Lord's Name and ts Dyed in the Precious Red of the
Lord, |S

Meditate thou a the Lord, the True One.

By the Guru’s Word does one Realise one’s Lord from whom is all Creation. /J-Pause/]

They, in whose Lot it was Writ by God, they Met with the Guru.

And in the love of his Service, O my Merchant-friend, their mind was Illumined by the Light of the
Lord’s Name. :

Blessed is the Trade and the Trader who Trades in the Lord’s Merchandise.

Bright are their Faces and they Meet with their Lord, the God.

Nanak : the Guru is met by those on whom is the Grace of God, the All-good. /6/

Reflect on the Lord with every breath, every morsel of food.

My mind is in love with those whose daily routine is (Meditation on) the Lord's Name. [ f-Pause-J]

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Bterwal, the Hulightener-
Var of Sri Rag, M. 4, with Shalokas

Shaloka M. 3

Sri Rag is the most blessed strain (of music), if (through it} one loves the Lord’s Truth. P. &3
And for ever does the True One Abide in the mind, and the mind is held by the Grace of the Infinite Lord.
Reflecting on the Guru’s Word, one Receives the Priceless Jewel (of the Lord’s Grace),

‘One's tongue becomes Pure, also one’s mind and body's form.

Nanak : by Serving the True Guru, one Deals only in Truth. {JJ

M.3

All love goes?, if it has not the Lord as the object.

Our minds are tended by Maya; so we can neither See nor Hear.

Without Sceing the Lord, Love does not spring (in the heart), then what can the Blind do ?
Nanak : the True Lord, who took away the Eyes (of Wisdom), alone restores them to us. [2]

Pauri

One only is the Lord of Creation and One His Court;

His alone is the Command; keep ithe One alone in thy mind,
Without Him there is no other : remove thy Doubt and Fear.
Praise thou’ Him, who Protects thee within thy home and without.
He, on.whom is His Grace, Swims across the Sea of Fear, J]

Shaloka M. 1

_ The Gifts:are all God's; with Him one is all-too-helpless.
Some Receive them not, while awake; others He Blesses by Awakening them from their Sleep. /JJ.

1. sfg-(wfrr) ; (Sindhi}: way, path,
» 2% wy d (ey 8) : leaveth (wGes, ae).

* F

BS IIIS @uru-Granth Sahib

www. sikhbookclub.com
Faith and Contentment are the food of the a me beings! ;

They alone See the Vision of the Perfect (Lor
and talk,

Pauri

Thou, O Lord, Created all and Assigned a given Task to each ;
Thou art the one Pleased on Seeing Thy own Glory.
There is no one without Thee : Thou art the True Master ;

Thou Thyself Pervadest all, all over.
Meditate ye on Him, O Saintly beings, by whom are all Emancipated. be

Shaloka M, 1

Vain" is the pride of caste, vain the pride of glory.

The Lord alone gives Shade to all ;

He, who of himself, feigns glory (is vain).

For only if the Lord Approves of him, is he Approved, [J] °

M. 2 - om
a a

If one loves one’s beloved, one dies before he dies.
For, cursed is the life of the lover without his love. [2

Pauri

Of Thyself, O Lord,Thou Created the two lamps of the sun and the moon:
Of Thyself Thou Created the fourteen stores’ wherewith men Trade. . es

os

They, who are turned God-wards, reap the Profit : .
Them the Yama touches not, who Drink-in the Nectar of the Lord’s Truth.

They are themselves Released and also their Kins ; nay, the whole world is Saved for their sake.

Shaloka M. 1

The Lord Creates nature and then Pervades it.

He, who Avails the span® (of Life), is the (True) Servant of the Lord.

Nature has a value, and yet is beyond value ;

He, who sets a value on it, becomes mute (in the end),

(A Muslim) dwells on the Prophet's Way :

But, without Wisdom, how shall he know the End 7

Let thy bowings be of Faith and Knowledge of mind thy object? of (study).
And, then thou See-est the Presence of thy Lord wheresoever thou See-est. [J]

M., 3

The Society of the Guru is not found by being near or far ;
Nanak : the True Guru is attained when thy mind lives for ever in his Presence. [2]

Pauri

Seven islands, seven seas, nine continents, four Vedas and eighteen Puranas,
Thou alone, O Lord, Pervadest all ; all these love no one but Thee. ;
All Creation is dedicated to Thy Worship, who Holds the earth in His Palm®.
I am a.Sacrifice unto those who Meditate on Thee,

Thou Thyself dost everything ; O,. wonderful are Thy Doings! [4]

1. .Menfeat (wareni).: (Arabic), plural of Malik (fsa) (angelic being).

2. wifegr (arger) : (Sans:), gossiper.

3. gaz (wee) ; from gas, that which has no juice ; valueless,

4. gn (arve) : at (then) + ua (only).

5. fe. the fourteen /okas (7 heavens and 7 under-worlds).

6. eu (wag) : (Arabic, gag), time.

7. mage (wage) : (Arabic, wage), the object of desire.

a. ArgaTuret Cree) : (Sans. (arénarfe) ‘He, i in whose-hands rie) 8 is the carih (ria)

|

there is no place there for those who only but gossip?

[3]

P. 84

MBEBELALCECSCOSSEGIOC BOOCOCPOCEOCOCLOOCHL EOSBEHCOCHOSECECOSS:

Sholoka M. 3
Why ask for a pen* and the pot of ink? ?
Write on the Tablet of thy heart.

For the pen and the ink-pot and their writings will all go,
But not so the Love of the Lord, for, it is Writ in thy Lot by God. [J]

M. 3

That what seems goes not along with thee, see thou anywise® for thysclf, — ;

The True Guru has embedded in thee the Real Name, be then in Communion with the Real.
Nanak : the Truth is in the Word, but, it is by His Grace that it is Revealed to thee, [2/

Pauri

Thou, O Lérd, art within and without ; Thou art the Knower of my inmost secrets.
Whatever I do Thou Knowest ; Gather-in the Lord, O my mind !

He alone is in fear who commits Sin: the righteous ones are ever in Joy ;

When Thou alone art True, when Thy Justice too is True, whom shall then we fear 7?
Nanak : they who Realised the Truth, became one with the Lord's Truth, 5]

Shaloka M. 3

Burnt be the pen, the ink, the paper,
And burnt be the one who writes of Duality.
Nanak : one does what is Writ for him by God ; (for) one can do nought else. [{J/

M. 3

False is all other reading, false is all other speech ; false the love of Ma aya.
Nanak : without the Lord’s Name nothing is eternal : they, who read of (another) waste their lives away.

[2]

| Abide for ever and ever in the Love of the Lord,

Pauri

Glorious is the Lord’s Praise, Glorious the Singing of it.

Glorious is the Lord's Praise, for His Justice is in accordance with His Law.
Glorious is the Lord’s Praise, for one attains one’s heart's Desires.

Glorious is the Lord’s Praise, for He Hears not our traducers.

Glorious is the Lord's Praise, for He Gives without asking (another), 6]

Shaloka M. 3

They, who indulge in Ego, (know not that they) die, without taking any of their Treasures along.
They suffer Pain for their Duality and the Fama haunts them all.
Nanak : one is Saved only through the Guru, by Dwelling on the Lord's True Name. [J]

M. 1

We are good at talk, vicious in deeds.

Our minds are black from within, though white from without.

We mimic the ways of those who Serve at the Lord's Door,

Who are [mbued with the Love of their Spouse and Revel in His Joy,

Who are power-less even when in power and are humble and meek.

Saith Nanak, "Blessed is my life, if Thou, O Lord, Unitest me with them.” 2]
Pauri

Thou Thyself art the water, Thou Thyself the fish and the net.

Thow Thyself Castest* the net, Thou Thyself art the film’ upon the water.

But, + dike the lotus, Thou Remainest Detached, deep are Thy Roots (in Mud), but Thou Losest not Thy
0

Thou Thyself Givest Release, in an instant (as brief) as the striking of a Thought.

O God, nothing is beyond Thee ; (but), Thou art Realised through the Guru's Word. [?]}

. 389 (mez) : corrupted form of zen, pen. ' sos ;

MAHL (Tata) : (Saas. sniterit), inkpot.

. feQuefe (frearg) : (by) fe (other) + Gurfz (means).

. gear (warger) : (it, to spread out ; also fondle ; be a sacrifice unto another.

+ Here (@arq) : (Sans. tyra), film upon the water. .
6. Huet fee garg (& ger fire garg) : fit, even though struck ‘deep a funded hands (8 ow Fee), Thy: Glow
(gee) (remains), ; .

CS ad ge

GSOSHSSSOSCOSESSOSCOEE
ie ete BR

Page 125 | | 
Shaloka M. 3

He, who knows not the Lord's Will, Grieves :

In him is the Doubt, and so he rests not in Peace.

If the Bride were to walk in the Way of the Spouse,

She attains Honour at Home and is called to the Lord's Palace,
Nanak : by His Grace is this lesson learnt,

And through the Mercy of the Guru, one Merges in Truth. [J]

M.3

O self-willed (fool), bereft of the Lord's Name, be not enticed away by the colour of the safflower.

Its colour will last a few days, its worth is little.

In Duality were Blind fools wasted away :

In Dirt, like worms, they lived and lost themselves. .

Says Nanak, “They, who were Imbued with the Lord's Name, are of (True) Colour; for, they take on
the Guru's Poise.

Their Colour of Devotion fades not and they Merge in the Great.Peace”. /2/

Pauri ft

Thou, O Lord, Created the universe and brought Sustenance to ail ;

Some Jive by tricks and utter nothing but falsehood.

This too is Thy Will for Thou Engagest them: in this-task.

Some Realise the. Truth and Receive Unlimited Treasures (of the Lord’s Name).

Blessed are they who eat in Thy Remembrance ; for they, who don't, are ever in want. /&]

Shaloka M, 3

The Pundits read and recite the Vedas, but all for the love of Maya.

Lured-by Duality, they forget the Name of the Lord, and so their minds are in anguish.

Why not call on Him, who Gave thee body and life and Provided thee with succour ?

(Else), the Yama's noose will be snapped not, and thou wilt come and go again and again.

The self-willed, blinded fool knows nothing and practises what is in his Writ.

By Breat good Fortune, he Meets the True Guru, the giver of Peace, and into him Comes the Lord's

ame.

He enjoys Happiness, wears Happiness and passes his whole life in utter Peace.

Nanak : let us not forget the Lord's Name from our minds, for which we receive Glory at the Abode
of the True One. /I/

M. 3

Serving the True Guru, I found Peace, the Lord's True Name is the Treasure of All-good. P. 86

Through the Guru's Word, I Realised the Self, und into me came the Light of the Lord’s Name.

I Practised the Truth, but the Glory is in the Hands of the Great (Lord).

His is the body and the life ; 1 Praise Him and pray to Him,

By the Praise of the Lord through the Word, one abides in Eternal Peace.

All penances, all meditation, all discipline is in the mind; without the Lord’ s Name (in the mind),
cursed is one’s life.

Through the Guru's Word, we Receive the Name ; the self-willed are wasted away by Attachment.

Keep him as Thou Willest, O Lord, (for) Nanak is Thy Slave, /2/

Pauri

All are Thine, O God, Thou belongest to all : Thou art the Treasure of all.

All ask Thee for Gifts, and pray to Thee each day.

Whomsoever Thou Blessest he attaineth all ; to some Thou art near, to others far.

No other place there is to ask ; see for thyself, O my mind.

They, who Praise their Lord at His Door, their minds being God-wards, are Ilumined. /9/

‘Shaloka M. 3

The Pundit recites and shouts out (his Books) ; but (within him) is the love of Maya. —
Within himself he Realises not the Lord, and his mind is foolish and wild.”

He instructs the world in Duality, and knows not the Essence himself,

Vain is his life and he is born to die again and again. [7

POGOLOECYEOOSSGECEOE COOLCOOEOLOPOCOPOOCL C LSS SE OROSLECOBHESTOSSSESSOCOHCOREEOOBOLOOLOE

i
a
|

Page 126 a 
They, who Served the True Guru, received the Lord’s Name ; know ye this, think ye of this -
Eternally their minds are at Peace, and they shed their wailings.

Their Self eats up its Ego and becomes Pure by Reflecting on the Guru's Word.

Nanak : they, who are Imbued with the Word, are Saved; for, they Love their Lord. /{2/

Pauri

Blessed is the Service of the Guru ; through the Guru it is Approved.

He, on whom is the Lord’s Grace Meets with the Guru : He alone Dwells upon the Lord's Name.
Through the Guru's Word do we Receive the Lord ; and the Lord Takes us across (the Sea of Existence).
Not one has Received Him by forcing his mind : even the. Vedas testify this.

Nanak : he alone Serves his Lord whom He Attaches to Himself. //0]

Shaloka M, 3

Nanak : he is the bravest of the brave who overcomes his inner Ego.

And Praises the Lord’s Name, and thus Saves himself in this life.

He himself is Delivered, so are all his Kins.

They alone look Beauteous at the True Gate who Love the Lord’s Name.

The self-willed die in Ego ; even their death is a torture (to them).

(But), the Lord’s Will Works in all ; what can a poor (mortal) do ?

They who are lost in Duality and forget their Lord. .

Nanak : without the (Lord’s) Name, all else leads to Pain, and lost are one’s Peace and Poise. [Jj

M. 3

The Perfect Guru embedded the (Lord's) Name in me, and my Doubt was destroyed.

1 Sang the Praise of my Lord, the God, and He Illumined my heart and I saw the Path.

My Ego departed and I was in Communion with the One ; into me came the (Lord’s) Name to dwell.
Through the Guru’s Instruction, | Merged in the True Name and the Yama touched me not. P. 87
The Creator alone Pervades all and he, on whom is His Grace, is Attuned to the (Lord's) Name.
Nanak, the Lord’s Slave, lives by Uttering His Name ; and even for an instant without it, he dies. [2]

Pauri

He, who Repairs to the Lord's Court, is accepted at all courts.

Wherever he abides, he looks Beauteous ; even the Sinners are Saved by looking at his face.

Within him is the Treasure of the (Lord's) Name which makes him Glorious'.

Worship then the (Lord's) Name, Believe in it, and all thy Sins will depart.

Poe who Dwelt on the (Lord’s) Name with the singleness of mind, became Eternal for the world.
Cy

Shaloka M, 3

Worship the Supreme Lord® with the Guru's Poise.

If the (individual) Soul has faith in the Over-Soul, it Realises the Lord within its own Home.

And the Soul then wavers not, like the Guru's good nature.

Without the Guru, one enters not into the Great Peace, and the dirt of Avarice goes not from within.

If the Lord’s Name comes into thy mind, even for a moment, thou earnest the merit of bathine in’ the
sixty-eight holy waters.

When one abides in Truth, one is Soiled not ; it is in Duality that the mind is Soiled.

And the Dirt is washed not off even if one bathies at all the places of pilgrimage.

The self-willed practise the deeds of Ego, and earn nothing but Pain.

Nanak ; the Soiled one is Cleansed only if he Merges inthe Guru. /1/

M. 3

How can one instruci the self-willed persons :

They look odd (in the Holy Society), and go the Round as are the deserts of their deeds.
Communion and Separation a.. the two Ways : one does as is the Lord’s Will.

Through the Guru, one stills (the Ego of) one’s mind ; and tests it on the Touchstone of the Word.
One grapples with one’s mind, and .-ttles with it alone ; and is then at Peace with the mind.

1. yagfant (reaftr) : (Sans. (wrt), n.--* “csellent or distinguished ; exalted.
2. wirgut SG (ara fy) : erat Be, The Supreme Self, ie., God.

ae) G@uru-Granth Sahib
He attains his mind’s Desire through the Love of the True Word.

Drink thou for ever the (Lord's) Nectar-Name; do this deed by the Guru’s Grace.

Jf one grapples with some thing other than the mind, one wastes one's life away.

The self-willed lose the Game through obstinacy of the mind, and practise Falsehood.

By the Guru's Grace, the God-wards win over their minds, and enter into Communion with the Lord
Nanak : they Practise the Truth, while the self-willed are born to die, over and over again. [2]

Pauri

O Saints of the Lord, my Brothers, hear ye this Instruction of the True Guru,

He, who has it in his Destiny Writ in his Forehead, keeps it in his heart.

(For him), the Lord's Gospel is Nectar-sweet and Glorious, and he Tastes it through the Guru's Word,

the natural way,
His mind is Iumined, and dispelled is his Darkness, as the sun draws the night (into itself)’,

And ihe Unseen, the Impereeptible, Unknowable, Immaculate—Him the eyes See, by the Guru's
Grace, [2]

Shaloka M1. 3
He, who Serves his True Guru is accepted (by the Lord).
(For), he loses his Ego and is in Communion with the Lord's Truth.

He, who Serves not the True Guru, wastes away his life. a
Nanak : He, the Lord, Does what He Wills, and no one can ask Him ‘why 7? [J]

M, 3 :

My mind is girt by Evil—it does the Evil deeds;

The ignorant minds worship Duality, and they are Punished at the Lord’s Court.

Let me Worship the Supreme Lord; but how shall I Know of Him without the True Guru ?

All meditation, all penance, all continence, is in the acceptance of the God's Will, but through the

Lord’s Grace does this (Wisdom) dawn.
Nanak : Serve (thy Lord) with a high mind, (but) that alone in thee will be Approved which thy Lord

Likes, [2]
Pauri

Dwell on the Lord's Name, O my mind, which brings thee peace, night and day.

Dwell on the Lord’s Name, O my mind, which washes off all thy Sins.

Dwell on the Lord’s Name, O my mind, which drives out thy Hunger and Pain and Poverty.

Dwell on the Lord's Name, O my mind, by Loving the Lord's great Lovers.

I Meditate in the mind on the Name of the Lord, who has Writ on my Forehead this great good
Destiny. {73

Shaloka M, 3

&)

f)

&)

f)

)

They, who Served not the True Guru, and Dwelt not on the Word, g
€)

A)

é)

é)

p

@)

P. 88

On them the Lord's Wisdom never dawned; Dead are they even in life.

They wander through myriads of lives and are born to die and be wasted away.

But he alone Serves the Truc Guru, on whom is His Grace.

The True Guru in himself treasures the (Lord's) Name : but it is through the Lord's Grace that one
Attains to it.

He, who is Imbued with the Truth enshrined in the Guru’s Word, his Communion is True.

Such a one the Lord Meets and Separates him never, and he Merges in the Great Peace. /J/

M.3

f)
J
H)
Vaishnava is he, who knows no other but the Lord. &
And by the Guru's Grace, Realises himself. 6)
He holds his mind, and brings it (back) to its only Home. oe
His self dies, and he utters (nothing but) the Name of the Lord. a
Blessed is such a Vaishnava for he Mergesin Truth. [2] ‘ 2
M, 3° 2
If one has guile in oneself and calls oneself a Vaishnava, :
He finds not the Lord through deceit. . .
If he slanders others, he gathers Dirt within. 3

1. fararel (frerdt) : (From Sans. wt, to draw), Also, to obliterate, to remove.

Guru Granth Salih 99992999990999999999999900999999999909028099999090"

Page 12
[ 80 ]

If he washes (his body) from without, the Dirt of the mind goes not.
He, who enters into argument with the Holy

Is eternally in Pain, and is lost in Duality.

if one remembers not the Lord's Name, but does (good) deeds,

His destiny’s Writ is wiped not.

And he finds not Deliverance without Serving the True Guru. [3/

Pauri

They, who Dwell on the True Guru, are burnt not (by Duality) to ashes;

(For), they who Dwell on the True Guru, are satiated.

They, who Dwell on the True Guru, fear not the Yama.

They, on whom was the Lord's Grace, took to the Guru’s Feet. P. 89
Their Faces sparkle both here and Hereafter, and they are Robed at the Lord’s Court. . [/4/

Shaloka M, 2

Chop off the head that bows not down to the Lord. . :
Nanak : the human frame, not charged 8 with (God's) Love, is worth only being burnt, /J}

M.5

Losing my Way since the beginning, I was s born to die (again and over again).
Lo, I wandered about, and fell into a Puddle, mistaking it for a Pool of Musk. ar

Pauri_

Dwell on the Lord’s Name whose Writ is over all.
Dwell on the Lord's Name which Saves thee in the end;
Dwell on the Lord's Name which Drives out all thy mind's desires and cravings.

By the Guru’s Grace, the Fortunate ones Dwelt on the (Lord’s) Name, which brought all their vile
traducers to their Refuge.

Nanak : Meditate on the Great Name, for, all bow down before the Lord’s Name. /J5/]
Shaloka M, 3

The ugly Woman, without Merit, Bedecks herself with beauteous Clothes, but her mind is Impure,
For, she Walks not in the Way of the Spouse, and likes her own command to run.

He, who Walks in the Way of the Guru, all his pai goes,

(For), no one can erase the Writ that the Lord Wrote since Eternity.

He surrenders his body and mind to the Spouse, and Joves the Word.

Pray, who has received Him without (dwelling on) the (Lord's) Name ?

Nanak : she alone is Beauteous and of Merit whom the Creator Himself Enjoys in Joy. [7]

M. 3

The love of Maya is like darkness, its shores are unknown.

The self-willed ignorants suffer great Pain, and are Drowned, forgetting the (Lord’s) Name.
Every day they do all kinds of deeds, but ‘their love is of Duality,
He, who Serves the True Guru, Swims across the Sea of Existence.

Nanak : the God-wards are Merged in Truth; for, they keep the (Lord's) True Name in their hee. xs.
Pauri

The Lord Pervades the earth, the waters, the inter-space, and there i is no other than sim.
He Himself Adjudicates and Drives off the false.
He Grants Honour to the Truthful; True, True, is His Justice.
Praise ye all the Lord, who is the Refuge ‘of the poor and the supportless,
Who Honours the Righteous and Punishes the Evil-doers: [J6/ _

Shaloka M. 3

The self-willed ugly woman, With: “ait merit, and of evil repute,
Leaves off the home and her spouse and loves another man.
Her desire is never sated and she is ¢,>~ burnt by Lust,.and so she wails;

(So is), Nanak, (the man)without the '-"2's” Name, like the ugly woman. whom her man has
abandoned. [J] :

Ee ee ETE) Gurn-Granth Sahib

-www-.sikhbookchib.com
He, who is Imbued with the Word, is like the bride in love with her lord,
Who enjoys her spouse for ever, for she is truly m love with him.

How utterly pretty is she ; O praise be to her. P.
Nanak : through Love of the (Lord's) Name is she made a true Bride, and is United with Himself by
the Lord, /2/

Pauri

© Lord, all of us creatures Praise Thee, for, Thou hast Delivered us of our Fetters,

We salute Thee, for Thou hast Kept us away from Sin.

Thou art the Streneth of the weak; Thou art the Strongest of the strong.

The Eroists are humbled by Thee and the self-willed fools put on the Right Path.

And Thy Devotees are blessed with Honour and the poor and the hapless succoured, O Lord! [7] \

Shaloka M. 3 ‘

He, who walks in the Way of the True Guru, attains great Glory.

He in whose mind Abides the good Name of the Lord, him no one can destroy.

He, whom the Lord Favours, His Grace is upon him.

Nanak : the Cause is in the Hands of the Creator, but only the God-wards Realise it all. [7

M. 3

Nanak : they, who Dwelt on the Lord's Name, are eternally in Communion with the Lord,
Maya is in the service of the Master and she serves too the Servants of the Lord,

The Perfect One has made (the Devoice) Perfect, and, by His Will, is he Saved.

He, who Realised (the Truth) by the Guru's Grace, attained to Salvation.

The self-willed know not the Will, them the wild Yama destroys.

They, who Dwelt on the Lord, by the Guru's Grace, Swam across the Sea of Fear.

The Meritorious Lord, Wipes off all our demerits for, He is the Lord of Forgiveness. [2]

Pauri

The Devotees have Faith in the Lord ; (for) the Lord Knows all. ,
Know not another like Him, for, the Lord Ministers nothing but the Law.

Why fear or doubt when He never is Unjust.

True is the Master, True is His Justice ; only the Evil-doer suffers defeat.

Praise ye, O Devotees, the Lord with joined palms, for He Saves ye all. /J8]

Shaloka M. 3

I seek to Unite with the Lord and to keep Him in my heart.

I Praise the Lord ever and for ever, through the love of the Guru.

Nanak : he, on whom is His Grace, him He Unites with Himself, and he alone is the True Bride of the
Lord, fil

M. 3

We find our Lord through the Service of the Guru ; but only if the God's Grace be upon us.

They, who Meditate on the Lord’s Name, from men they become angels.

Their Ego is dispelled; they enter into Communion with the Lord and are Saved through the Guru’s Word,
Nanak : they Merge into the Great Peace, by the Grace of the Master. /{2/

Pauri

The Lord Makes the Devotee Worship Him by Revealing His Glory to him.

(Nay), the Lord Himself Puts the Faith in the Devotee, and through him Serves Himself. P. 91
He Bestows Bliss on the Devotees and Gives them a Seat in the Eternal Home.

He Makes the Sinners wander and Condemns them to the deeps of Hell.

His Devotees He Blesses with His Love, and Saves them with His Support. /19/

Page 13
{ 82)

Shaloka M. 1

Ignorance is the Drummer-woman; heartlessness the Butcheress, ”

Slander is the Sweepress in the heart ; anger is the Chanddl. _

What use is it (O Pundit), to mark off (thy kitchen), when all the four Outcastes are within thee,
Let Truth be thy continence ; good Deeds thy markings ; Meditation on the (Lord's) Name thy bath,
Nanak : they alone are-held sacred (in the world beyond) who instruct*® not the others in Evil. [7]

M. 1

Whether one be a Swan, or a Crane, one is Saved only by the Lord's Grace.
Nanak ; if the Lord so Wills, He Turns (even) a Crow into a Swan. /2]

Pauri

Ask thy Lord if thou wishest thy work done.

Through the True Guru's Word, He Accomplishes thy tasks.

In the Society of the Holy, Drink then the (Lord’s) Nectar, the Treasure of Good.
© Thou, the Dispeller of fear, O Merciful Lord, save my Honour,

Says Nanak : Singing Thy Praises, One Knows the Unknowable Thou. [20]

Shaloka M. 3

To Him, the Lord, belong our body and Soul ; He is the Mainstay of all.
Nanak : Serve thou Him by the Guru’s Grace ; for, He is thy Benevolent Lord.
Sacrifice am I unto them who Dwelt on the Formless He. ‘

Their Faces sparkle and them the whole world greets. [J]

M. 3

Meeting with the True Guru, (my mind) is turned away (from Maya), and I expend the Nine Treasures
(of the Lord's Name).

The Eighteen Miracles follow my footsteps, and 1 abide in my True Abode within myself.

Beyond the desires of the world?, [ live in Communion with the Lord, and (in my mind) Rings ever the
Unstruck Melody (of the Word).

Nanak : the Lord's Devotion comes but to those in whose Lot it was so Writ by God. /2/

Pauri

I, a Bard of the Lord, went to call at His Door.

The Lord Listened to my Plaint from Within, and Called me into His Presence.

And Asked me He : ““What brings thee here, My Bard 7"

“Grant me, O Merciful Lord,” I pray, “the Gift of Thy Name.”

My Lord, the Benevolent God, Granted my prayer and I was Blest with the Robe of Honour. [2/-//

GECCESCCOOCOSCCOCOCLE CELE EPOCCOC ELD

Oe

By the Grace of the One. Supreme Being, tle Lternal, the Enlightener.

Sri Rag of Kabirji

(To be sung in the Measure of ‘Ek Svan'y*

The mother thinks, “my son is growing’’ : she knows not his days are wearing off.

The moré she says, “he's mine”, and loves him, the more the angel of death laughs. [J]

Thou, O Lord, hast cast the world in Doubt. ; P. 92
How can one realise Thee, when one is lured by Maya? //-Pawse]

Says Kabir, “Leave thy love of Poison ; in its company thy death is sure,

Call on the All-pervading Lord, O life, whose Word is life-giving for ever: and carries thee across the
Sea of Existence.” [2]

lL. aval (artt)=ars, sale : lines, which the devout Hindus draw to mark off their kitchen from the rest of the
compound. This is done to establish and preserve its sanctity.

2. ufe (of) (Persian), advice, instruction.

3. Qanis (s7aFr) : (Sans. gen, agitated ; also from Sans, g-qqaqa, high mind). According to Yoga, he alone,
who withdraws from the world, is in the state of Unmana.

4. That is, in the same measure as the hymn titled, “Ek Svan" (Sri Rag, M. 1).

Cat at) thats tht) Guru-@Granth Sahib

B GSSBO SHS HOSS SSS SSSSSHCOOSOESSCSOCL SOO By ty Ott hye et

Page 13
When the Lord so Wills one Loves the Lord,

And one's inner Doubt is cast away.

One attains Poise and the mind is Awakened to the Lord's Wisdom.

And, by the Guru’s Grace, one enters into Communion (with the Lord). /3/

In His Company, one dies not.

And, if one Realises His Will, one Meets with Lord the God. (7]—Second Pause!

Sri Rag of Trilochan

In one’s mind is the immense love of Maya ; and one forgets the fear of age and death,
One flowers like 6 lotus, by seeing his kins, and the vicious man, casts an evil eye upon anerhees
woman. [I

But when, (Age), the offspring of the yama! comes with a terrible message
One feels helpless — before it
Rare is the friend who says :
“Take me, Thou, my Lord, into Thy Embrace,
Meet me, my Lord, and Deliver me (of Maya).” [J —Pause}

Others) indulge in pleasures, forsaking their Lord, and thinking themselves to be immortal.

heated by Maya, they Remember not (the Lord), and idle away their lives, [2]
O man, one has to tread a hard and dreadful Path, where there is neither the sun nor the moon.
When one leaves the world, where will then be one’s love of Maya? [3/
Today, in my mind, I Saw the Lord of Law,
Whose couriers smothered® me with their powerful hands and I could not stand up against them. £4].
If'someone makes me Wise, I See the Lord Pervading the woods and glades.
Says Trilochana, ‘Thou art All-knowing, All-pervading, yea, Thou, my Lord!" (5-2

Sri Rag of Bhagat Kabirji

Listen, O Pundit, the One Lord is Wonderful ; no one can tell of His Glory.

He has Enticed the angelic men, the Devotees of gods, and heavenly singers, and bound the three worlds
with the string’ (of His Law). {J}

(Within me) Rings the Unstruck Melody of the Lord’s Flute;

Yea, He, in whose Presence one’s mind is Attuned to the Sound (of Celestial Music). [J—Pause/

The (mind’s) sky is the furnace and of the two funnels (of breath) the one sucks-in and the other spits-out;

And then into the golden pot (of the heart) is distilled the pure stream of blissful Nectar. [2/ .

And lo, the wonder of wonders, that the breath is the cup.

But rare is the Yogi whose way is this : even a king reaches not his Glory. /3/

Says Kabir, “Such Light did J get of the One on High, that T was filled with His Love.

And, while ‘the rest of the world is deluded by Doubt, my mind is Imbued with the Reality of the Real".

[4-3]
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Hnlightener-
Sri Rag : Hymos of Bhagat Beni ji
[Te be sung in the Measure of ‘Pahre'] ;

O man, when you were encased in the womb, and standing on your head you were engrossed in

meditation, P. 93
Your body was listless and the pride of being a man was not yours, your ignorance was in silence, and

night was as was the day. ;

Recollect those days of your great woe, now that you've spread (the net of) your mind out and afar.
Leaving the womb you entered the mortal world and forget you the Lord of man.

3. wees (#tea) : who smother (zg) with their hands (az).
4. Hue) (gat) : (Sans, Haran), string.
5. Herat (gama) ; (from Sans a), void.

a
3
rao ger (te wor) : et (Sans, a) : son of the Yama,
2 ga ela (get atgaife) : ger is from efx, a Sindhi word, meaning couricr; messenger. |
i]

Gurv-Granth Salih 9209999900990920999922200099000009020292990900008
Page 132
You will-repent forsure, O fool, why do you then indulge in Vice and abide in Doubt ?

Remember the Lord or you go to the abode of the Fama.

Why, O man, you wander wildly* thus? {/-Pause]

Like a child you play and crave every moment for lust and like tastes :

And festa good and evil, sour and sweet, and wines and meats ; and the five (Desires) land you forsure
In Pain.

You abandoned Meditation and Penance, and Continence and good Deeds, and remembered not the
Name of the Lord.

And lust sprang up in you, your mind was darkened and a woman" was bound to your neck. [2]

In the sow of youth, you ravished the beauties of other women and distinguished not between good and
evil.

Intoxicated by Lust, the great craving of man, you knew not what is Virtue, what is Sin 7

And Your mind was proud of your sons and your riches and you cast the Lord away from your heart.

And You calculated your share in the estates of the dead, and in Lust and pleasures of the palate* you
_wasted your life away. 3]

White i rama a hair like (white) flowers and your voice was (feeble as if) coming out of the seventh
UAGErworld,

(The mer) yor eyes dimmed and your intellect and prowess decreased, the more your Lust was churned

and grew),

And Desire rammed on your mind, and the lotus of your body withered away.

Forgot you in the mortal world the Word of the Immortal Lord and Grieved thereafter. [4]

‘You were pleased at the sight of your young babes* and, in pride, you knew not (the Real).

And even when thy eyes saw not, you hungered for more and cosier life.

When your light was extinguished and the bird (of your soul) flew away, in your own compound no
one liked you. :

Says Beni, ‘Listen, O Devotees, who has ever attained to Salvation after (such a) death?” [5]

Sri Rag of Ravidas

Thou art me; I am Thou : where is the difference ?

Do the gold and the golden bracelet differ? Or, the water and the waves? [J]

If I wouldn't sin, O Thou Infinite One,

How wouldst Thou be called the Purifier of the sinners? {/-—Pause/

Thou art known as the Master, the Inner-knower of ourselves,

So am I Thy Servant Known : from me, the Servant, art Thou (known) the Master. [2]
I call on Thee, “O Lord, grant me this Wisdom,

That Ravidas knoweth Thee equally in all®, everywhere.” [3]

- Mean (ace) : (Sans, afeg), wild.
- Fats, (wafr)—nast : the divine female,

1
2
3. gar uf (war gfe) : (The joys of) ga (Sans; wt) female organ and fy (mouth,) i.e., of the palate.
4. fsael (fraéh) = frat ; small, tender,

5. AM @5 (47 qa) : who is alike (AH) toall (es, crowd),

22200 Guru-Granth Sahib

Page 13
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, The Fternal, the All-pervading,
Purusha, The Creator, Without Fear, Without Hate, the Being
Reyoud Time, Not-incaruated, Self-existent, Che Rulightener.

Rag Majh, Chaupadas, M. 4

I Cherish the Lord's Name in my Mind, P. 04
And Meditate on it by great good Fortune. g

The Perfect Guru has attained Perfection in the Lord's Name, y kA
(But) rare is the one who walks in the Guru’s Way. ///

l have gathered the fare of the Lord's Name for my Journey (in the Yond).

It is the Life of my life, and keeps me company for ever.

The Perfect Guru has made me Wise in the Lord’s Name ;

And its eternal Treasure remains for ever with me, {2/

My Lord is my Friend, my Beloved, my King.

Who would take me to my Lord and give me a new Life ?

T cannot be without Seeing my Love, and my eyes are welling up with tears, {3

Since my childhood, the True Guru is my only Friend. .

J cannot Be without Secing him.
O Lord, be Merciful and take me to the Guru that from him Nanak gathers Thy Name. /{4-J]

Majh M. 4

The Lord? is my mind, my body, my life.
Without the Lord, I know not another.

Oh, how shall [ get to my Love.

I join the Society of the Holy and know that ‘tis there that Abides my Lord, the God, /2/
My Love, my True Guru, Thou art my Refuge ; .

Tam Thy poor child, Sustain me, O my Father and Mother.

Without Thy water, O dear, my Lotus has withered away. [3]

Without Seeing Thee, I find no sleep ;

And my body and mind suffer the Pain® of Separation® (from Thee) ;

Take pily on me, O Lord, and let me meet with my Guru, that I may Blossom forth. [4-2]

f

Majh M, 4

Read thou of the Merits of the Lord and Meditate on them. . P. 95

Hear the Lord's Name recited and uttered.

Join the Society of the Holy to Swim across the impassable (Sea of Existence), O dear! [I

Come my friends, let us Meet our Lord, the God.

O my dear friend, bring me a Message from my Love.

For, he alone is my friend and beloved who shows me the Path to my Lord! /2/]

My Pain is known to my Perfect Guru, and to my God,

Without uttering His Name, I cannot Be.

Give me Thy Mantram, O Lord, which is the Cure of my Ailments, for, through Thy Name, O dear, I
am able to Swim across. /3/

lam like a Charrik-bird, in the sanctuary of the Guru.

He' puts the Nectar drop in my mouth.

T am like the fish in the Lord's Waters ; without water, O dear, how cana fish be ? [4-3]

1. ngges (ayqar): Mit. Krishna, the slayer (qea) of Madhu, the demon.
2. Sen (ea) : (Sans. deat), pain.
3. fray (foreg) = free : (Sans. freq), separation.

Page 13

7
pi
&)
o)
-)
&
3
3
2
If, by good Fortune, I meet with a Saint, he shows me the Way to my Love. /J/
I have searched through my body and mind : . ;
&
g
a

[ 86 ]
Majh M. 4

O Saints, O Servants of the Lord, meet me, my Brothers, *

Show me the Way to my Lord: I Hunger for Him.

Oh Thou Life of the world, fulfil my Faith,

That Meeting with Thee, my mind is sated (with Thy Love), [J

In the Society of the Holy, I Recited Thy Word.

It Pleases me when I Recite Thy Gospel,

Thy Nectar-Name is the only Love of my mind.

Meeting the True Guru, ] Drink Thy Nectar, /2/.

By preat, good Fortune, one finds the Society of the Holy :

The Unfortunates wander about in Doubt and Suffer. ;

Without good Fortune, one finds not the Society of the Saints and without it one’s mind remains Soiled,
LY

Meet me, © Life of all life, .
Be Merciful that my mind gathers-in Thy Name, O dear, .
And it seems sweet to my mind, and my mind is Imbued with it. [4-4]

Majh M, 4

The Guru has made me Wise in the Lord ; from the Lord IJ taste the Reality of the Real.
My mind is Imbued with the Lord's Love, and Drinks it to its fill.

My mouth utters the Name of the Lord, and my mind is filled with utter joy. [JJ
Come, O Saints, take me to my Lord's Embrace :

Recite to me the Gospel of my Lave ;

I'll give my mind away to him who utters the Guru’s Word with the mouth, [2/

By good Fortune, I met the Lord’s Saints :

The Perfect Guru has Poured into my mouth the Essence of the Lord,

Him the unfortunates met not,

And the self-willed were eternally cast into the womb. /3/

He the Lord is Merciful and Beneficent.

He has washed off all the dirt of Ego (from within me).

Nanay ytnin our body are the Stalls from which the God-wards buy up the Wares (of the Soul).

Majh M. 4

I Utter the Praises of the Lord ; 1 Recite His Name ;
1 join the Society of the Holy and in-gather the (Lord's) Name in the mind.

y Lord is Unknowable, [mperceptible : Sing thou, O dear, His Praise by meeting the True Guru. [J]
Blessed is the One who Knows the Lord. P, 96
Him I ask about the Master.

I Press his Feet and Wash them clean,

And, in his Company, Drink the Nectar of the Lord's Essence. /2/

The True Guru, the Beneficent, has made me Wise in the (Lord's) Name.

By great, good Fortune, I entered into the Presence of the Guru.

His Essence is Nectar-sweet ; Nectar-sweet is His Word :

O dear, Drink thou the Nectar from the Perfect Guru, /3/

In the Lovd’s Holy congregation, ] Meet the True Person,

Here [ Dwell upor the Name of the Lord ;

One hears and Recites here, O Nanak, the Gospel of the Lord,

And instructed in the Guru's Wisdom, one’s mind is held by the Lord's Name. [4-6

Majh M. 4

Come sisters, meet me, © dears !

She, who tells me of my Lord, unto her I am a Sacrifice.

In the Society of the Holy, I find my Friend and Lord ; O dear, 1am a Sacrifice unto my True Guru.
I

f
Wherever I See, I See my Master! .
Thou, © Lord, Pervadest all hearts, O Thou the Inner-knower.
The True Guru has shown my Lord within me ; unto the Guru [ am a Sacrifice a hundred times, [2]

Page 13
All are created of the same air and the same clay; same is the Light in all;

The one Light Pervades all; of none other's there is a transfusion.

By the Guru's Grace | found the One; O dear, Sacrifice am I unto the Guru. = /3/

Nanak, the Lord's Servant, utters but the Nectar-Word.

This, the Guru's elect love and adore.

The Perfect Teacher Instructs us in Perfection, for, He in his Mercy, ts ever Beneficent to us, {4-7/

Majh M. 5, Chaupadas

My mind longs to have the Sight of the Guru :

In tears, it wails like the Chatrik-bird.

My Thirst goes not, nor Peace I find, without the Sight of the beloved Saint, [J]
Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I unto the Sight of the Saint, my Guru, my Beloved, //+Pause]
Pleasing is Thy face, O Holy one; Thy Word Rings one into the Great Peace;

How long, how long, i$ my Separation from the Lord of the earth to be ?

Blessed, Blessed is the Land where Thou livest,.O my Friend and Master! [2]

Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I unto the Guru, my Friend and Spouse and Lord. /J-Pause]
If Thou met not me for a moment, the Dark Age dawned for me.

When am I to Meet Thee now, my Love, my Lord ? P, 97
I can pass not the night; sleep comes not to me, O dear, without Seeing Thy Court, [3]
Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I unto Thy True Court. [/-Pause]

By great, good Fortune, I've met the Guru-Saint,

And found the Eternal Lord in my own Home ;

I Serve him ever and go not from him fora moment. [4]

(Says) Nanak, Thy Servant, “I am Thy Slave, O my Lord !"" {Pause 1-8]

ik

Rag Majh M, 5

Blessed is the season when I Cherish Thee.

Blessed the work that I accomplish for Thee.

Blessed the heart on which Thou Rainest (Thy Mercy), O Thou, the Giver of all! /J]
Thou art the Father of wus all.

The nine Treasures (of Thy Name) are inexhaustible.

He, whom Thou Blessest, is for ever Sated; and he Devotes himself to Thee. [2]
All abide in Thy hope :

On all hearts rains (Thy Mercy).

All are partners (in Thy Grace); O dear, Thou art alien to none. [3]

Thou, of Thyself, Deliverest me through the Guru.

Thou, of Thyself, Makest the self-willed wander through, birth after birth.

All that seems is Thy Play : Sacrifice is Nanak, Thy Slave, unto Thee. [4-2-9]

Majh M. 5

How naturally Rings the Unstruck Melody in my mind,

That my mind revels ever in the Joy of the Word.

And I find my Seat on high, composed in the Silence of Peace. [J]

I wandered and wandered and then arrived at my Home; *

And I found what I had longed for,

O Saints, he, the Guru, Satiates all, and Awakens our Intuition’ to See our Lord. [2]
He is the King, He the subject too;

He is the one Detached also Attached;

He alone Sits im the True Seat of Judgment, |

And by Him all the Prayers are Answered, the Prayers of all. [3]

I have described Him as I Saw Him :

But He alone has his Taste who Knows of His Mystery;

And one’s Light Merges in the All-light, for, Nanak, the One alone Pervades all. [4-3-10}

l. wpe? usy (ware qq) : é¢, the Purusha who is realised through Anublava (intuition),

Guru-Granth Sahib 9909992
Page 13

PEBECOCCESSOSGSSHESCOCOSEEECTESESECEGECPESSCEECREEGEECEEE

[ 88 ]
Majh M. §

Sing thau the Wedding-songs, O my friend,

Where the Bride has found the Spouse;

All Joy, all Bliss is there, where the Lord (with His Presence) Bedecks the Bride. [J]

She is meritorious and of good Fortune;

Blessed with sons, and Character, and the Joy of the Lord;

And Beauteous too, and Wise and Clever’, for, she is the beloved of the Spouse, [2]

Blessed is her Culture;

And with Wisdom is she bedecked. .

She is a:woman of Family, (a sister) of Brothers, who bedecks herself with the Love of the Lord, [3/7

Of her Glory one cannot tell, whom the Spouse has Clasped in His Embrace : ;

Her Spouse is the Eternal, Unknowable, Transcendent Lord; and she has Love as her only a.
[4-4-H1} ,

Majh M. 5

[ search for Thee that I may See Thy Sight,

And for this I have treaded through a myriad mazes of the woods;

Thou art the Absolute, Thou the Related One.

Is there one who'll Unite me to my Lord? fl}

He, who talks of the wisdom of the six Shastras,

Of worship, the frontal mark, and of bathing at the holy places,

And the churning of the stomach, and the eighty-four postures of the ascetic,
Finds not Peace m them. [2]

For years, the Yogi meditates and practises penance,

And wanders through the whole world,

But he finds not Peace in his heart even for an instant,

And Ventures out again and over again, /3/

By His Grace, I met the Lord’s Saint,

And my body and mind got cool Comfort.

The Lord Immortal came into my heart ; and so Nanak Sings the Song of Joy. /4-5~I2]

Majh M. 5

My Transcendent Lord, who is the Unfathomable God,

Unknowable, the Yonder of the yond, Mysterious,

Merciful for the meek, Supporter of the earth,

Through the Guru call thou on Him, the Giver of Salvation, /[J/

Through the Guru, the Madhusudana Saves thee.

Through the Guru, the Murari becomes thy Friend.

Through the Guru, one Attains to the Lord Merciful, Damodara, and by no other means. [2/
He, who is sustained not by food, is of Beauteous Hair, and is without enmity,

His Feet myriads of people Worship and Adore,

And he, in whose heart He Dwells by the Guru's Grace, is Devoted to Him and Him alone. [3]
He, whose Presence is Blissful?; He, who is Infinite.

He the All-powerful and the Ever-merciful,

Meditate thou on Him, by the Guru's Grace.

But rare, O dear, is the one who reaches this State. [4-6-—J3/

Majh M. 5

In Thy Will is what we do; we take what Thou Givest.
The poor and the supportless have Thy Support alone. |
Thou art everything, O my dear; Iam a Sacrifice unto Thy Power. /J/
1. fawule (Prrafa) ; (Sans, firrerr), clever. ,
2. ay ears (ate seer) : the vision (gars), which is never (»{) fruitless (ty); Aes cons (THT ToT) also
has the same meaning,

Page 13
In Thy Will, do we wander ; in Thy Will, do we find the Way,
_" In Thy Will, do we Utter Thy Praise, by the Guru's Grace.
In Thy Will, are we cast into a myriad wombs,
All, © all this is Thy Will, OQ Dear! [2]
Neither is there any wise or unwise,
For, it is Thy Will that Works all over.
Thou art Unfathomable, Beyond knowing, Infinite ; Ineffable is Thy Value, /3/
Bless me with the Dust of Thy Saints’ (Feet).
I have come to-Prostrate before Thy Gate,

On Seeing Thee my mind Satiated,
Says Nanak, “O Lord, Thy Meeting comes about only the natural way”.  [4-7-14/

COO

ASS

Majbh M. 5

eh

When I forget Thee, [ am in Pain,

And feel the pangs of Hunger ; and Wander about in many directions.

When | Call on Thy Name, I am at Peace,

(But) he alone Receives Thy Name on whom is Thy Mercy,O Dear! [J]

My Lord is All-powerful ;

When I gather Him in my heart, all my Sorrow departs.

And depart my Ego and Anxiety and Afflictions all.

And the Lord Himself Sustains me, O dear! /2/

I ask of Him all things, like a child,

And He, the Beauteous Lord, is Tired not of Giving.

I fall at His Feet to reconcile Him to ‘myself,

(For), He is All-merciful to the poor, yea, He the Supporter of the earth. [3]
Sacrifice am I unto my Perfect Guru,
Who cut the Fetters off my (feet), : ;
And made me Beauteous and Pleasant, by Purifying my heart with the Lord's Name. [4-8-J5]

P. 99

Majh M. 5

O Thou my Love, Gopal, All-merciful, All-love,

O Thou, the Unfathomable, Deep, Infinite, Govind,

© Highest of the high, Immeasurable and Transcendent Master,

I live by Calling on Thee. [J

© Thou, the Destroyer of Fear ; O Thou, the Treasure beyond value,
© Thou without fear, without hate, without end, Unweighable ;

© Thou the Being Eternal, Unborn, Self-existent,

By Calling on Thee my mind attains Peace, O Dear! /2/

Ever, ever, is my friend the Love of Gapdl ;

He Sustains the high and the low :

His Name, the Essence of all Joy, Satiates my mind,

And I Drink the Nectar of His Name, by the Guru's Grace. [3]

In joy and in sorrow, do | call on Thee, O Dear !

This good disposition I Received through the Guru.

For, Thou alone art my Refuge, O Lord !

And T Swim across (the Sea of Existence) through Thy Love, O Dear! /[4-9-J6/

Majh M. 5:

Blessed is the time when I meet the True Guru.

His Presence is Blissful ; His Glance Saved my soul.

Blessed is the auspicious time, the moment, the hour, when 1 Meet my Lord, the God. [JJ
Making the Effort, my mind became Pure,

As I walked in His Way, my Doubt was cast away.

The True Guru made me Wise in the Lord's Priceless Name,
And my Afflictions were no more. [2]

Within and without rings Thy Word, O Lord !

Thou Thyself Uttered it, Described it whole. ;

Truly did the Guru say, “He is One, and One alone,

And there is not another, nay none," 0 Dear! /3/

Page 13

MACYOEC EC GCOHOSSESEGOCCOCOCEAROCOEREOLE SES HC OLS SECHCOCOERES

[ 90 ]

=» J] Drank the Lord's Nectar-Name from the Guru,
The Lord's Name became my Food, my Wear. i hae
1 Loved the Name and Revelled in it ; how wonderful was its Joy, O dear! [4-/0-J7]

Majh M. 5

I ask of all the Saints, “Pray, Bless me with a Gift,”

I pray to them meckly, shedding all my pride.

Iam ever w Sacrifice unto them and pray, “Bless me with the Dust of thy Feet". [J]

Thou art the Giver, the Maker of our Destiny,

The All-powerful, the Ever-giver of Peace :

(O Lord), all are Blest by Thee : Fulfil my life too, O Dear! [2]

They, who Saw Thy Presence, Blessed are their bodies.

They won a Victory over the unconquered fortress of their innerselves,

Thou art the Giver, the Maker of our Destiny ;

And no one is as Mighty as Thou art,O Dear! /3]

I apply the Dust of the Saints’ Feet to my Countenance, P. 100

And, my unfortunate Ignorance and false sense (of values) depart ;

And | abide in the Abode of Truth and Utter the Lord's Praise, and all my Falschood is cast away,
[4-11-18]

Majh M. 5

© Thou, the Beneficent Lord, let me not forget Thee.

By Thy Mercy | am Imbued with the Love of Thy Devotees.

© my dear Lord, grant me this gift that I Meditate on Thee night and day. [J]
In the dead dust (of my body), Thou Puttest a mind,

And, all the places Thou hast given us are good.

O, Wonderful is Thy Play of Joy.

All that happens is in Thy Will, O Dear! [2]

The Lord's are the Gifts that we receive ;

Thirty-six kinds of delicacies, a cosy bed and cool wind,

And the enjoyment of joys in peace. /3]

Give me the Mind, O Dear, that forgets Thee not.

Give me the Wisdom that I Meditate on no one but Thee,

And I Praise Thee, with every breath, .

And seek, O Dear, no other, but the Guru's Refuge. /4-/2-J9]

Majh M, 5

To.walk in Thy Will is Thy Praise,

For that alone is Wisdom and Concentration (of mind), which Pleases Thee.

That alone is Contemplation that Thou Likest,

And, to abide in thy Will, is Perfect Knowledge. J]

He alone Sings Thy Nectar-Name,

Whom, Thou, O Master, Blessest.

Thou belongest to the Saints, the Saints are Thine,

The mind of the Saints is Pleased with Thee, O Master! [2]

Thou Sustainest Thy Saints,

Thy Saints Sport with Thee, O Gopal!

Thy Saints are ever Dear to Thee, :
For, Thou, O Dear, art the life-breath of the Saints. /3/ .
Sacrifice is my mind unto the Saints,

Who Know Thee and whom Thou Likest in Thy Mind.

In their Society, is my mind at Peace, =~

And Nanak is Satiated with the Essence of the Lord. | [4-13-20]

Majh M. 5

Thou art the Sea, Ia fish within Thee.
Thou art the (Celestial) Drop ; lam a Chatrik-bird athirst for it, °
Thouw art my Hope ; Thine is-the Hunger (within me),
And with Thee alone is my Mind Imbued,
NO,

Page 13
As the child is satisfied with the (mother’s) milk,

As the poor are pleased al the sight ol riches,

As the thirsty one is cooled with cool water,

Sois my mind fulfilled with the Love of the Lord. /2/

As the lamp lights the darkness,

As the wish of the longing bride is fulfilled,

And on meeting her spouse her mind is in bliss,

So is my mind Sated with the Love of the Lord. /3/

The Saints showed me the Way to the Lord.

By the Grace of the Saints, I got accustomed to the Company of the Lord.
The Lord became mine and | His,

For the Guru had Blest me with the True Word, /{4-/4-2/]

Majh M. 5

The Nectar-Name (of the Lord) is for ever Pure,

The Giver of Peace, the Dispeller of Sorrow,

I have tasted all other tastes ; the sweetest is the Essence-of the Lord. /[7/

He, who Drinks it, is Satiated, P. 101
And becomes immortal he who Drinks the Essence of the Lord's Name.

The Treasure of the (Lord’s) Name is his on whose mind rains the Guru’s Word. (2]

He, who Receives the Fssence of the Lord is Fulfilled.

He, who Tastes the Taste of the Lord, wavers not.

(But) he alone Receives the Lord's Name in whose Lot it is so Writ, [3/

The Lord has come only into the hands of the one (Guru) who has Blest myriads of people ;
Through him were myriads Saved.

The Lord's Treasure is Received through the Guru's Grace.

But rare, O Nanak, are those who have Seen their Lord. /4—J5—22]

Majh M. 5

My Lord has the (nine) treasures, the (cighteen) miracles, and all the riches,

His is the gift of life, too ; yea, His who is Deep and Unfathomable.

Myriads of pleasures are his who takes to the Feet of the Guru. /[J/

Secing the Lord's Sight, one becomes Pure,

And one Saves also one’s kins and fellawmen.

He, our Master, is Unknowable and Unfathomable.

And it is by the Guru’s Grace that one Meditates on the True One, [2]

He, whom every one searches in every way,

Him only the Fortunate one Sees.

Yea, that High, Infinite, Unknowable Place one Sees through the Guru, O dear! [3]
Thy Nectar-Name O Lord, is deep, too deep.

He, in whose heart it Abides, is Emancipated. .

Of him, the Guru cuts all the Fetters off, and he Merges in the Peace of Poise. {4-J6-23] |

Majh M.5

Meditate thou on the Lord, by God's Grace.

Through the Lord's Mercy, Sing thou the Songs of Joy.

Upstanding and downsitting, awake and in sleep,

Meditate thou on Him thy whole years' through, O dear! [J]

The Saint brought to, me the Cure of the Lord’s Name,

And I was purged clean of Sin,

And I became Blissful and my Pain was no more, [2]

He, whose side my Love ‘takes, is Ferried across the Sea of Existence.
He, who Realises his Guru, Practices Truth, of whom can he then be afraid? [3]
Since, I joined the Society of the Holy, _

And Met the Guru, the Devil in me has left ;

Nanak Sings, with every breath, the Praises of the Lord.

And Jo, the Lord has Covered his Shame. /{4-J7-24]

1. siege (wateT) = sera : life-time.
Guru-Granth Salib 9999229999999999999999999999999999
Page 14

MELOLACCECOCEOSOGOGE COCOA APCOSISEEEOOELE CEL BSLOOS PEC UC OCOESSOSOCOCOBGOCOCOBGOESOCOOHI
|

HOSCCECOSCLAOSCEOOCECEECECOCCOS

o

nds A

Majh M. 5

The Lord is intertwined with the Servant like warp and woof, .
He, the Lord Sustains His Servant, yea, He the Giver of Peace :
I bring water for His Servant, fan him,

And grind his corn ; for this also is the Service of the Lord. [1]
The God has Cut my Noose off and Yoked me to His Service.
The Command of the Master pleases me, His Slave,

And I do what Pleases my Master.

And so I become Great, both from within and without, [2/
Thou the Master art All-wise, and Knowest all our states.

I, being Thy Servant, Enjoy Thy Blessings.

All that is Thine, is mine,

For, the servant is known from his Lord and Master. /3/

He, whom the Master Honours with the Robe,

Is not called to Account thereafter.

Unto that Servant is Nanak a Sacrifice,

For he is Deep and Profound, yea, the Jewel ofa man. [4-/8-25

Majh M. 5

All things are in thy Home, (O mind), not one is without ;
And he, who searches without, is lost in Doubt.

The one who Realised the Lord within, by the Guru's Grace,
Is at Peace both within and without, O dear! [1 /

When the Lord's Nectar drips into oneself,

And the mind Drinks and Hears and Reflects upon the Word,
One is ever in Joy,

And for ever Sports with one’s Lord, O dear! /2/

P, 102

He is United (with) the Lord, yea, he who was Separated from Him birth after birth.

By the Saint's Grace, the dry bones of a Tree blossom into leaf and flower ;
One obtains good Conscience, and Meditates upon the Lord's Name,

And through the Guru is United with the Lord, O dear! /3/

As the waves of water merge with the water,

So is one’s light merged in the All-light.

Says Nanak, the Evil of Doubt is torn off,

And (one comes and) goes! not again, O dear! [4-/9-26]

Majb M. 5

Sacrifice am I unto him who has Heard of Thee, O Lord !
Sacrifice am | unté him who has Uttered Thy Name with his tongue,
Sacrifice am I unto him who Meditates on Thee with his whole mind, O Dear !
I wash the Feet of him who walks in Thy Way,
Of that Beneficent one I crave to have a sight,
I give my mind to him, my Friend and Teacher,
Through whom is the Lord found. [2]
Fortunate is he who has Realised Thee,
Who abides in the midst of all, yet remains Detached.
He’ Swims across the Sea of Existence in the Society of the Saints.
And conquers all the Demons (within himself), /3/]
Of him I seek the Refuge.
And all my Ego and Pride is lost, and the Darkness of Attachment is dispelled,
And I pray, “Grant Nanak the Gift of the Lord’s Name,
Yea, the Lord’s, who is unfathomable and Unknowable, O dear !"" [4-20-27]

Majh M. 5

Thou art the Tree ; Thou that Branches off ; Thou art the Blossoms, too.
Thou art the Subtle, Thou the Apparent ;

Thou art the Ocean, the Foam and the Bubble,

Without Thee, I see not another, O Dear! /J/

Page 141

1. aGaer (wear) : (Pothohari), qae!, wae", to go.

4]
Thou art the Thread ; Thou the Beads.

Thow the Knot (that holds); Thou the Top-bead!

Thou art the Beginning, the Middle and the End :

I see not another without Thee, O Dear! [27

Thou art the Absolute, the Related ; Thou the Giver of Peace:
Thou the Detached, Attached ; Thou the enjoyer of Joy ;
Thou alone Knowest Thy Play ;

And Thou alone gatherest all into Thyself. /3/

Thou art the Master, Thou the Slave,

Thou the Unmanifest, Thou the Manifest.

Nanak, Thy Servant, ever Sings Thy Praises :

Bless him, O Dear, with a moment's Glance of Grace. [4-2/-28]

Majh M, 5
Blessed is the Word which Reveals the Lord's Name ; P. 103
(But) rare is the one why Knows (the Word), by the Guru’s Grace.
Blessed is the time when one Hears and Sings (the Praises) of the Lord,
And one’s life is Approved. /J/
Blessed are the eyes that See the Lord's Sight,
Blessed the hands that Write the Lord's Pratse,
Blessed the feet that Walk in the Lord’s Way,
Sacrifice am | unto them ; through them the Lord is Revealed to me. [2]
Hear, 0 my friend, my mate, my love,
In the Society of the Saints was [ Saved in a moment.
My mind was purged clean of the Sins and my comihg and going has ceased, O dear! [3/
With joined palms, I pray to Thee, O Lord,
Have Mercy, and Save this Sinking Stone .
To Nanak the Lord is Merciful, and his mind is Pleased with the Lord. {4-22-29}

Majh M. 5

O Lord, Thy Word is Nectar-sweet :

Hearing it, I attain to the highest State (of Bliss).

The Fire (within me) is quenched and my mind is Cooled

On seeing the Sight of the True Guru, /J/

I have attained Peace : gone is my Sorrow

On hearing the Saint's tongue Utter the Lord's Name,

The Earth (of the body) and the Ocean (of the Mind) are filled to over-flowing with the (Nectar of the
Lord’s Name);

And goes not one not Blest by His Grace, {2/

The Creator has Showered His Mercy upon me,

For, He Sustains all His creatures.

He is ovr Beneficent and Kind and Merciful Lord.

All are Satiated by Him (with His Grace). /3/

In an instant, woods and glades and the three worlds are in bloom

By the Grace of the Creator,

Nanak Meditates on Him who Fulfils the Desire of the Mind O dear! /4-23-30]

Majbh M. 5

Thou, O Thou art my Father, my Mother :
Thou, O Thou art my Kin, my Brother,
When Thou art my Refuge all over,

Why then may I be in fear, OQ Dear! J]
By Thy Grace alone I know Thee; @
Theu art my Shelter, my Pride;

No one is (mine) without Thee,

And all is Thy Play in the Play-field (of the world), {2)

1. ig (ire) ; the largest bead in the rosary.
*)

Guru-Granth Sahib 999999299999999999999090009999999999099929999900908

e
e)
J
“)
é)
e)
8)
e)
p)
€)
J
&)
)
a
o
é)
fi
€)
€)
J
a
)
‘g
é)
&)
&)
e
2
;

Page 14
And not according to mine, O Dear! [3]

Meditating on the Lord's Name, I found the Great Bliss;

Reciting Thy Praises, my mind (was held) in Peace ; -

And I won the hard Battle* (of life) : and through the Guru's Grace, my Victory was echoed all over,
O Dear! [4-24-31]

Majh M. 5

God isthe Life of my life ; the Mainstay of my Mind.

The Devotee lives by Singing His endless Praise,

The Lord’s Name is the Treasure of Good,

And I attain Peace by Calling on the Lord, O dear! [JJ

With whatever wish one goes (to the Lord, it is fulfilled).

In the Society of the Holy, his comings and goings cease.

And, all one’s Desires are fulfilled on Seeing the Guru's Sight. [2] P. 104
Thou the Lord, art Unknowable, beyond Comprehension, Infinite.

On Thee Meditate the Seekers, the Siddhas and the Wise,

And their Ego goes and their Doubt departs.

And they See Thee, their Lord, by the Guru's Grace, in their minds. /3/
He, the Lord, is All- joy, the Treasure of Salvation,

He is the Giver of Peace and Poise throngh His Name.

When He, the Lord, is Merciful,

One Receivest His Name in one’s Home, O dear! [4-25-32]

Thou alone Created all Thy creatures,
And Yoked them to the work as Thou Willed,
All that happens is in Thy Will

e)

e)

Majh M. 5

I live by Hearing Thy News, O Lord !

(For), Thou art my Love, my Great Master.

Thow alone Knowest Thy Miracles,

I seek Thy Refuge, O Gopal,my Dear! [J]

Reciting Thy Praise, my mind is in Bloom :

I hear Thy Gospel and all my Dirt departs.

Repairing to the Society of the Holy,

I meditate on my Lord, the All-merciful, {27

I Remember my Lord with every breath :

This is the Wisdom my mind has learnt, by the Guru's Grace.
Through Thy Mercy is all Light ; and Thou, the All-merciful, Sustainest all, /3/
True, how True, is the Lord:

He, who is Eternal, for ever Himself,

Whose miracles are all-tao-manifest,

And Seeing whom Nanak has been Blest, O dear! /4-26-33/

ogee’

Majh M. 5

By Thy Will, comes the rain (of Mercy),

And in the Society of the Saints one Calls on Thee.

And, one attains Happiness and Peace and the Great Poise. [J]

Thou hast Created all things in abundance,

And, by Thy Mercy, Thou hast Satiated all beings.

Be Thou ever Beneficent, © Lord, that all are fulfilled for ever, O Dear! /2/

True is the Master, True is His Name ;

Meditate on Him for ever, by the Guru's Grace.

He Dispels thy Sorrow and Delivers thee of Attachment and the fear of births and deaths. /3/
Hail, Hail, Nanak, to the Loac Sor ever, : ;
Meditating on whose Name one’s Fetters are cut off,

And one is Fulfilled m an instant,

And one Dwells on the Praise of the Lot. /4-27-34]

1. frst (fiparer) : Sans, (frre ag) the unconquerable fortress.

OS CESSEOSOCSSCHSSOSHOSSSOCOSOHG SEES

FIDIIGII9999I3939 2999390900900 Guru-Granth Sahib
Page 14
Come ye friends, mates, my loves,

Let us in unison Sing the Praises of the Lord Unknowable and Infinite.
For he, who Hears or Sings the Lord's Praise is Emancipated,
Meditate ye on Him who Created ye, O dears! [J /

Your Sins of ages will depart,

And ye will receive your heart's Desire,

Meditate on Him, the True Master,

Who Brings sustenance to one and all, O dear! [2]

Meditating on the Name, we attain All-peace,

All our Fears depart and, we Dwell on the Lord’s Name.

He, who-Serves Him, Swims across,

And all his Works are accomplished, O dear! [3]

I seek Thy Refuge, O Lord !

Unite me with Thyself as Thou Willest : _

Take Pity and Yoke Nanak to Thy Worship P. 105
That he may Drink the Nectar of Thy Truth, O Dear! [4-28-35]

Majh M. 5

My Lord, the Supporter of the earth, is in Mercy,

And it Rains all over;

He who's Ever-kind to the poor, the Ever-benevolent Creator, has Cooled us all, Q dear! [J]
He Sustains all His creatures,

As the mother supports her child,

He is the Dispeller of Sorrow, the Ocean of Peace,

And Provides all He with sustenance, O dear! /2]

He, the Compassionate Lord, who Pervades the land and the sea,
Sacrifice am | unto Him a hundred times,

Let's Meditate on Him, night and day,

Who Redeems allin a moment, O dear! [3]

The Lord Himself has Protected all,

And all our Sorrows and inner Pains are gone.

Meditating on Him, the mind is ever-green, and so the body,
And on Nanak is the Lord's Eye of Mercy, O dear! [4-29-36]

Majh M. 5

Even if one Meditates on the Lord’s Name in a ruin’, it becomes a castle of gold.
And where one Meditates not on the Name, that habitation is like a ruin, O dear! [JJ
If one has unbuttered bread to eat, one must gather still the Lord (into one self);
And the Lord will Bless him with His Eye of Grace.

(But) he, who eats well and does Evil,

His life, know ye, isa field of Poison. [2]

He, who Loves not the Samts,

And does Evil deeds in the company of the worshippers of Maya,

That man of Unwisdom has lost his precious life,

And has pulled himself out by the roots, O dear! /3/

© Thou, Beneficent to the weak, I seek Thy Refuge.

Thou art the Ocean of Peace, my Lord, the Supporter of the carth,

Be Merciful that Nanak may Sing Thy "Praises;

And thus may Thou keep his Honour, O Dear! [4-30-37]

Majh M, 5

I treasure in my heart the Feet of the Master,
And all my Sorrow and Pain are stilled,
Within me Rings the Music of Bliss and Peace,
And I Abide in-the Society of the Saints, O dear! [J]
1. wa forex] (91% Firertt) : (Sans. qremfipq), he who swims across (the sea of existence).

2. nas (Mat) —1-+-Rae : that which is not (nf) populous (mag).

ANN A ee

SoS

ABEGEOHCCECSCSSSSSSSOSS GOSSESSCHCSCOCLECECEEESSOECEESECECBES

:

¢
;
Es
¥
z
©
|
:
:
|

Page 14
[ 96 ]

My attachment (to the Lord) cannot be broken off,

Yea, my Lord, who Pervades us within and without.
Meditating on His Praise, one is delivered of the Yama's Noose, [2]
The Lord's Word is like (the Yogi's) Unstruck Melody,
Like the Rain of Nectar it rains (upon the mind),

And my body and mind are Merged in Peace.

Thy Servants, O Lord, are Satiated,

For, the True Guru has given Hope to their hearts. [3]
One gets the Reward from him

To whom one belongs.

The Lord, in His Mercy, Unites us with (His Saints),
Such men of Destiny no longer come and go.

And so, Nanak, their Wishes are Fulfilled. /4-3/-34

Majh M. §

It has rained : I have found my God:

And all His creatures are now in Peace.

Our Sorrows are gone, True Happiness has dawned,

And we gather-in the Name of the Lord. [J]

He, to whom we belonged, Sustained us.

Yea, the Supreme Lord became our Refuge. P. 106
My Master listened to my Prayer, .
And I was Fulfilled, (2/

He, the Lord, is the All-giver. :

By the Guru's Grace, He Blesses all with His Eye of Mercy;

And all lands, all seas, and the interspace are Sated.

I Wash the Feet of such a Guru, [3]

He, the Lord, Fulfils all,

I am ever, for ever, a Sacrifice unto Him.

Says Nanak : “The Dispeller of Fear, my Delightful Lord, has Blest me

With His Love.” [4-32-39]

Majh M. 5

Thine is the body, Thine the mind, Thine the riches,

For Thou art my Lord, my Master.

My body and life too are Thine.

Thine is the Power working through them, O Dear Lord! [J]
Thou art for ever the Giver of Peace,

I bow down humbly at Thy Gracious Feet;

I do what Thou Willest, O Lord,

When Thou, in Thy Mercy, Blessest me thus,O Dear! [2]

I seek all things from Thee, My Father,

For Thou art my Precious Jewel;

I find Peace in whatever Thou Givest me.

Wherever Thou Keepest me, that alone is Heaven & Hell

Thou art the Sustainer of all, O Dear! [3]

Meditating on Thee, Nanak has found Peace,

And eight watches (of the day and night) he Utters Thy Praise,
And, all his Wishes are fulfilled and he is never again in Sorrow, O Dear! [4-33-40]

Majh M. 5

The Supreme Lord has sent down the tains.
In the ten directions : over land and zea, all places are full to the brim.
There is Peace all-over; the 4..!>-* of all is quenched,
And there is Gladness all about, O dear! [J]
He, the Giver of Peace, is the Dispel'sr of Sorrow.
He, in His Mercy, Takes care of our Sov"
He Sustains all He Creates; ’
3 Fall thou at His Feet and Reconcile Him to thyself, dear! [2]

2222290 Guru-Granth Sahib ~
Page 14

He, in whose Refuge one finds Deliverance,

His Name one should Meditate upon, with every breath,

For, without Him, there is no other Master,

And all places belong to Him. [3]

T lean, O Master, on Thy Power,

For, Thou art the True Lord, the Treasure of Good.

Prays Nanak, Thy Slave,

“O Lord, Bless me that [ Meditate on Thee night and day”. {¢-34-4//

Majh M. 5

All is Peace all over ; the Lord is in Merey ;

The Sacred Feet of the Guru I gather in my mind :
(But), the taste of it is known to him alone, O dear,
Who in utter Peace and his mind composed,

Is in Communion with the Lord, [J]

My Lord is Unknowable, beyond comprehension,

(But) He Abides in all hearts ; He Lives so near ;
Detached He Remains, yet He Sustains all :

(But), rare is the one who Realises (thus within) himself. [2/
This is the sign of one’s Union with the Lord,

That in one’s mind one Realises the only True Will.
And one finds Poise, Contentment, and Satiation ;

And one revels in the Will of the Lord. [3]

God, the Beneficent, has Given me His Hand ;

And all my Pain of births and deaths has left ;

The Lord has made Nanak His Slave,

And so he Enjoys the Singing of His Praise. {4-35-42]

Majh M. $

The Lord, the Master and Supporter of the earth, is in Mercy,
And T fix my mind on the Feet of the Guru,

The Creator has Owned me as His Own.

And the Citadel of Sorrow (within me) has been felled. /J]
In my body and mind Abides the True One.

No place for me is impenetrable ;

All mine enemies are now my friends,

(For), I have Loved only the One who is my Lord and Master. [2]
He does what He Himself Wills,

Not by intellect or deftness can one find (His Mystery).

He is the Upholder of His Saints,

And through Him, O dear, is all our Doubt cast away. /3]
His Slaves lean on His Lotus-Feet,

And they Deal ever in His Name alone.

In Bliss and Peace, Nanak Sings the ee of the Lord,

Who Pervades all, all over. /4-36-4.

P. 107

Majh M. 5

That temple alone is true where one Dwells on the (Lord's) Truth.
That heart alone is sacred which Cherishes the Praise of the Lord.
That place alone is sanctified where abide men of God.

Oh, 1 am a Sacrifice unto the True Name! /{J/

The Lord is of True Worth ; no one can find His Value ;

No one can tell of His Bounties, nor His Power,

Thy Servants, O Lord, live by Meditating on Thee,

And Enjoying, in mind, Thy True Word. /2]

By good Fortune, we devote ourselves to the Worship of (the Lord’s) Truth;
And, by the Guru's Grace, Sing the Praises of the Lord.

They, who are in Love with Thee, O Lord, them Thou Lovest:
And the sign of Thy Pleasure with them is Thy Name. [3]

Page 14
# No one can find the limits of the True One,
For everywhere and in all places is He and He alone.
é O Nanak, Meditate thou ever on Him, the Inner-knower, the Ever-true. [4-37-44]

Majh M. 5

Blessed is the night, blessed the day,
When one Dweils on the Nectar-Name (of the Lord).
And keeps the Society of the Holy, _. :
And, where one Meditates on the Lord, even for an instant, one's life is Fruitful there alone, O dear !
{ij
Meditating on the Name, all one’s Sins depart,
And one Enjoys the company of the Lord within and without,
The Perfect Guru dispels all fear, all Doubt, from one's mind,
And one Sees the Lord, allover. [2]
The Lord is All-powerful, the Infinite, Highest of the high,
The nine Treasures of His Name are full to the brim,
He is the Beginning, the Middle and the End :
9 I seek not the nearness of another, [3]
Take pity, O Thou Beneficent to the poor,
=! Thy seeker seeks but the Dust of the Saint's Feet.
Nanak, Thy Slave, prays to Thee for this Gift
That he Meditates upon Thee for ever and for ever, O Dear! [4-38-45]

Majh M. 5

Thou art here, Thou art Hereafter ;

All the creatures are Thy Own Creation.

‘Without Thee, O Creator, I seek no Shelter,

Yea, Thine is the Refuge I seek, O Dear! [J]

The tongue is alive, Uttering the Master's Name.

Yea, He who is the Transcendent Lord, the Inner-Knower.

They, who Served Him, found Peace and Poise,

And lost not their lifeina Gamble, [2/

Thy Slave who found the panacea of (Thy Name), O Lord, P. 108
Was rid of the Afflictions of all the births :

He Sings Thy Praises night and day,

(For), this alone is the Fruitful Deed, O Dear! [3]

When Thou, in Thy Mercy, Blessest Thy Slave,

He Salutes Thee in every heart.

Nanak, without the One, there is not another,

Know ye, dears, that this is the essence of all Wisdom, [4-39-46]

(oa oa

Majh M, 5

Let thy mind and body be Imbued with the Love of the Lord,

And let thou sacrifice thy all (in His Way).

Night and day, Praise thy Lord,

And forget not Him even for an instant, O dear! [J]

He, the Lord is the Friend, the Beloved.

Reflect thou on the Lord’s Name in the Society of the Holy,

And thus wilt thou Swim across the Ocean (of worldly existence),

And cut asunder the Yarma’s noose, O dear! [2]

The four Boons are in the Service of the Lord.

To Dwell upon the Unknowable, the Mysterious, is to possess the Elysian Tree.

Thy Lust and Anger and Sins will depart, by the Guru's Grace,
- And thou shalt be Fulfilled, O dear! /3]

He, who has a great good, Fortune,

Meets, in the Society of the Holy, the Lord of the earth.

Nanak ; he, in whom Abides the Lord's Name,

Is Detached in attachment, (and as such), is he Approved. /4-40-47]

8 SeeooosrecaccesoeseeeE

* Page 14
Meditating on the (Lord's) Name man gathers Peace of the heart :
By Lord's Grace is his Devotion acclaimed among the Devotees;
And he Dwells on the Lord, in the Society of the Saints,

And all his indolence departs. /J/

He, in whose Abode are the nine Treasures of the Lord, O brother, (is Approved),
But he alone treasures them who Practised (the Name) in the Past.

All Wisdom, all Concentration, is in Dwelling upon the Perfect and Supreme Lord,
For the Lord is All-powerful to do all things, O dear! [2]

In a moment, He Creates and then Destroys;

He is the one, He the many;

He, the Life of life, is yet Detached from all life,

And in His Sight departs our sense of separateness, O dear! [3]

Holding on to His Skirt, the whole universe Swims across,

He Himself Invokes His Name in His Devotees,

And one finds the Guru's Boat by His Grace,

If, Nanak, one is so Destined by Him. [4-4/-48]

Majh M. 5

I do what the Lord Wills me to do,

Wherever He Keeps me is a sacred place.

He alone ts Wise, he alone is Honourable,

Whom the Lord’s Will seems sweet, O dear! /I/

All Creation is threaded in the one String;

He, whom He takes in His Refuge, repairs to His Feet;
He, whose inverse Lotus is upwards turned, gathers Light;
And he Sees the All-pure in all, O dear! [2]

Thou alone Knowest Thy Praise, O Lord,

Thou, alone Knowest Thyself,

T aim a Sacrifice unto Thy Saints

Who have smothered their Lust, Anger and Greed, O Dear! [3]
Thou art without enmity; Thy Saints are Pure,

Seeing whom all one’s Sins depart.

Nanak Meditates on Thy Name, O Dear,

And his Fear and Doubt depart forever. /4-42—f97

Majh M. 5

He, who asks for a false gift, P. 109
Dies in an instant; .
(But) he, who Serves the Supreme Lord,

And Meets with the Guru, is renowned as immortal. [J]

He, in whose mind is the Lord’s Devotion in Love,

Keeps Awake (in mind) night and day, and Sings the Lord's Praise.

Him the Master takes by the Hand and Unites with Himself,

Yea, he in whose Lot it is so Writ. [2]

The minds of the Devotees are fixed on the Lotus-Feet of the Lord,

Without the Mercy of the Supreme Lord, all were beguiled;

I seek ever the Dust of the Saint’s Feet,

And the Jewel of the Lord’s True Name. /{3/

Upstanding and downsitting Sing thou the Praises of God.

Meditating on Him we find the Eternal Groom;

The Lord is in Merey upon Nanak,

For he obeys ever the Will of God. [4-43-50]

Page 14
Page 149

GECHSOSSCESSS CSS CESS OSSOCOCSSOCEESSECOGCECAGSS

[ 100 }

Rag Majh, Ashtapadis, M. 1

By the Grace of the One Supreme Meing, the Hternal, the Hulightener.

All are Imbued with the Word, by His Will, ‘
And called to the True Mansion, the Lord's Court.

© Thou the True and Kindly Lord of the poor,

By Thy Truth is our mind satiated. [J]

Sacrifice am I unto Thy Beauteous Word, O Lord !

Thy Nectar-Name is ever-giver of all Peace.

Yea, it comes into the mind through the Guru’s Word, [/-Pause]
Neither is any mine, nor am I of any other;

T belong to the True Master of the three worlds ;

He, who passes his days in utter Ego,

And commits Sin, regrets (in the end). [2]

He, who Realises the Will, Utters the Praise of the Lord.

And, through the Guru's Word, gathers the Glory of the (Lord's) Name.
All leave this world to reckon for their deeds;

And are Emancipated only through the (Lord’s) Beauteous Name. [3/
The self-willed ignorants find no Refuge,

And Suffer grievously at the door of the Yama,

Without the (Lord's) Name, nothing keeps thee company, (O mind !)
One is Saved only by Reflecting on the Name. /4/

The lover of Maya is (false, for,) he loves not the Truth;

Bound to Duality, he comes and goes.

No one can erase the Writ of the Lord,

(But) through the Guru is one Emancipated. [35]

In the house of the Mother, (the Virgin) knows not the Spouse,
Through Illusion is she separated and weeps and wails;

Beguiled by demerit, she mounts not to the Couch (of the Lord)

But through Virtue does she have her Sins forgiven. [6]

She, who Knew the Spouse in the Parents‘Home,

And through the Guru Realised the Reality of the Real,

Merged im the (Lord’s) True Name,

And her coming and going ceased. [7]

Through the Guru, one Realises (the Lord) and Utters the Unutterable,
(Know ye that) the True Lord Loves the Truth alone.

Prays Nanak, ““O men know ye the Truth, and Sing ye the Praises of the Lord”. /8-J]

Majh M. 3

By the Lord’s Grace is the True Guru Met :

' And then alone one applies one's mind to the Lord's Service and (Reflects on) the Word.

And so one stills one’s Ego and gathers Eternal Peace,

And sheds one’s love of Maya. [J /

Sacrifice am I, © Sacrifice am I, unto the True Guru,

By the Guru's Word came Light unto me,

And I Dwelt on the Lord's Praise day and night. {1-Patse/]

He, who searches his body and mind, finds (within) the (Lord's) Name,
And then he holds himself, and his mind wanders no more.

And he Sings the Word of the Guru, day and night,

And Worships the Lord, the natural way. /2/

In this body are myriads of things,

But one Sees. only if one Realises the Truth through the Guru;

And closing one’s nine doors,

Enters into the tenth Door (of the Self),

And is thus Emancipated and hears the Unstruck Music of the Word. [3]

P. 110

290 Guru-Granth Sahih
True is the Lord, True too is His Name

Which comes into the mind, by the Guru's Grace,

And one is Imbued, day and night, with the Lord’s Love,
And knows the (Lord’s) Truth in the Abode of Truth. /[4/
He, who distinguishes not between Virtue and Sin,

And is altached to the Other, is lost in Illusion.

The Blind unwise wretch knows not the Path,

And so comes and goes, again and over again. [3]

In the Guru's Service, for ever did I find Peace,

And my Ego was stilled. ;
Through the Guru's Instruction my Darkness was dispelled
And the hard Door was opened unto me, J

Overcoming my Ego, | gather my Lord in my mind,

And my mind ts fixed for ever on the Feet of the Guru ;
Aad, by the Guru's Grace, my body and mind are purged,
And so I Meditate on the Immaculate Name (of the Lord). [7/
Life and Death are in Thy Hands, O Lord !

Thou Givest Glory to whomsoever Thou Blessest.

Says Nanak, “Dwell ye ever on the Lord’s Name

That ye may be Blest, both here and Hereafter”. /8-J-2]

Majh M, 3

My God is Immaculate, Unktiowable, Infinite :

Yea, He Weighs up the world without the scales.

He, whose mind is God-wards, knows alone,

For he, who Praises the Lord, Merges in the Lord of Virtue, fi]
Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I unto those

Who gather-in the Name of the Lord in their minds ;

And, who take to the Truth, keep Awake day and night at the Lord’s Door,
And (thus) attain Glory, {J-Pause]

He Himself Hears ; He Himself Sees.

He, on whom is His Grace, alone is of account.

He, whom He Himself Blesses, takes to Him.

And lives the Truth, by the Guru's Grace. /[2/

He, whom He Himself makes to lose His Path,

Whose, O whose, Refuge can he seek ?

‘That what was Writ by God cannot be erased.

Fortunate is the one whom the Guru Meets.

But, by True Destiny is (the Guru) Met. [3]

The Bride is ever in Sleep at her Parents’ Home.

Forgetting her Lord, she is abandoned to Sin,

Day and night she wanders about wailing.

For she gets not Sleep without the Lord, [4J

If she Realises her Lord, the Giver of Peace, at her Parents’ Home,
And stills her Ego, and Realises the Guru's Word,

Her bed is Beauteous and she Enjoys her Spouse,

Bedecked by the Beauty of Truth. /5/]

The Lord has Created myriads of species,

But he alone Meets the Guru on whom is the Lord’s Grace.

His Sins are washed off and he is made Pure,

And, at the True Door, he is made Beauteous by the (Lord's) Name. [6]
If the Lord asks the account, who of us can answer ?

{And if one renders the account), it is vain to count in twos and threes.
(So), one should pray for His Grace.

For, through His Grace, the True One Forgives us all,

And Unites us with Himself. {7]

He Himself is the Cause of causes,

And He is Met through the Word of the Perfect Guru.

Nanak : through the (Lord’s) Name one gathers Glory,

And, of Himself, the Lord Unites one with Himself. /{§-2-3]

<
«&
(3

|

my

9

Lo AS! end oh

Guru—Granth Salpb 999994 CRON Oo OL CR yy
Page 150

Page 1li

BE GIBEC COO SCSSSSGESCSOSOSOSSEESESECECIECECE ESSISSSSSCASSUCASSSBSASSEGGSASEEEEERGGAE —OOGEed
{ 102 ]
Majh M, 3

He js the One Unmanifest,

He's (also) the One made Manifest through the Guru.

Satiating my mind thus,

I assemble the One into me :

And, shedding Desire, I attzin to the Peace of Poise. {J]

Sacrifice am I, O Sacrifice am [,

Unto those who fix their minds on the One alcne.

Through the Guru’s Word, their mind comes into its only Home.
And is Imbued with the Love of the True One. /J—Pawse/

This world has strayed (from the Path) : O Lord, Thou hast made it be so.
And forgetting the One (alone) it loves the Other ;

Day and night it Wanders, beguiled by Illusion,

And suffers Pain, without the (Lord's) Name. /2/

They, who were [mbued with the Love of Him, Who makes our Destiny,
And Served the Guru, were known through the four ages.

He, whom the Lord Himself Blesses,

Is Merged in the Lord's Name. /[3/

Being in love with Maya, one remembers not the Lord.

And bound down at the Yama'‘s door, he suffers Pain.

He is Blind and Deaf; he Sees not a thing ;

(And so) the egocentric is burnt down by Sin. {47

They alone are in Thy Love whom thou Usherest into Thy Communion, O Lord !
And through Loving Adoration, Thou art Pleased with them ;

They Serve the Trne Guru, the ever-Giver of Peace,

And their Desire by Thee is Fulfilled. {3/

© Dear Lord, I seek Thy Refuge,

Thou Forgivest all and Grantest Glory.

The Angel of Death comes not near unto him, ,

Who Dwells on Thy Name. [6]

They, Whom Thou Lovest, are Imbued day and night with Thy Love ;
Thou Unitest them with Thyself :

And, they for ever seek Thy Refuge, O True One,

For, Thou Thyself makest them Know Thy Truth. /7/

He, who Knows the Truth, Merges in the Truth,

He Dwells on the Lord's Praise and Utters (nothing but) the Truth.
Nanak : in Love with Thy Name, one is truly Detached,

And Attunes himself only to one’s inner Self. /8—3-4]

Majh M. 3

He, who dies in the Word, dies (truly) .

Death kills him not ; nor Woe, nor Pain him destroys.

His light Merges in the All-light,

When he Hears, and Merges in, (the Lord’s) Truth. /7]

Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I unto the Lord's Name

Which brings us Glory.

He, who Serves the Guru and fixes his mind on Truth,

Merges into the Great Peace, through the Guru’s Word, [J-—Pause]
Impermanent is life : impermanent the garbs we wear .

The Bride, who loves another mounts not to the Lord's Castle ; F. 112
And, day and night, she.is cousumed by (inner) Fire,

And suffers great Pain, without her Spouse. /{2/

Neither the body nor the caste go along (with one) in the world,
Where one is to answer for his deeds. ;

Yea, one is released only by Practising the (Lord's) Truth.

They, who Serve the True Guru, are truly Rich,

And are Merged in the (Lord's) Name both here and Hereafter. [3]
She, who Decks herself with Love-in-Fear (of the Lord),

Enters into the Lord's Castle, by the Guru's Grace, as her Home,
She is Imbued with the Lord's Love day and night,

And her Colour, like madder’s, fades not. /4/

Page 15
The Lord of all Abides with all at all times,

But rare is the one who Sees Him, by the Guru's Grace.

My Lord is the Highest of the high,

And Unites me He with Himself, in His Mercy. [3]

In the love of Maya, the world sleeps ;

Forgetting the (Lord's) Name it is destroyed in the end.

He, who makes us Sleep also Awakens us to Himself,

(But), through the Guru's Word doth His Wisdom dawn, [6]
He, who Drinks the Lord’s Nectar, dispels his Illusion,

And gets himself Liberated, by the Guru's Grace ,

He, who is Imbued with the Lord's Worship, is for ever Detached,
And stilling his Ego is United with the Lord. {7

He, the Lord, Himself Creates ; He Himself Engages us in work ;
He, Himself Sustains myriads of species ,

Nanak : they, who Meditate on the (Lord's) Name, are Imbued with Truth,
And they do only what their Lord Wills. [8-4-3]

Majh M. 3

Within oneself is the Diamond, the Ruby; —.
But one finds its worth only through the Guru’s Word.

He, who has gathered-in the Truth, utters the Truth,

And tests (everything) on the Touchstone of Truth, /J/
Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I, unto those

Who gather in their minds the Guru's Ward,

And, living in the world, find the Lord Immaculate,

And Merge their light in His Light. /J-Pause/

Within this body are Vistas vast.

(in it is) the Immaculate Name, Infinite and. Unfathomable ;
(But) only the Ged-wards gather it ;

And the Lord, through His Grace, Unites them with Himself. [2
My Master Stresses nothing but the Truth,

And, by the Guru's Grace, one’s mind is Attached to Truth.

Yea, the Truth Pervades all, at all places,

And the True ones Merge in the Truth. [3]

‘The True One is my Care-free Beloved ;

He Purges us all of all Demerits, all Sins .

With Love devote thou thyself to Him,

And Worship Him in His Fear. [4]

True is our Devotion, if Thou, the Truc One, art Pleased ;

Thou Givest of Thyself, and Regrettest not thereafter.

Thou art the Beneficent Lord of all.

Yea, he, who dies in the Word, lives (for ever). [5]

Without Thee, O Lord, there is not another.

I Serve Thee, I Praise no other but Thee ;

Unite me Thou with Thyself, O my True Master,

(But), Thou art Attained by perfect Destiny. [6]

For me, there is not another like Thee :

By Thy Grace is my body Blest.

Thou Takest care of us, day and night,

And, by the Guru's Grace, are we Merged in the Great Peace. [7]
No one is as High as art Thou, my Lord ; ;
Thou Thyself Created (the Universe) ;

Thou Thyself wouldst dissolve it (into Thyself) ;

Thou Thyself Createst, Destroyest and Deckest all.

Sayeth Nanak, “O Lord, how Beauteous is Thy Name!" [8-5-6] PF. 113

Majh M. 3

He it is who Enjoys in ali hearts ;

Yea, He the Unknowable, Infinite, and Unfathomable, Works through all.
Call thou on thy Lord, through the Guru’s Word,

And Merge spontaneously in His Truth, {J)

Gurv-Granth Sabb

Page 15
Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I unto those

In whose mind Dwells the Guru's Word.

Realising the Word, one grapples with one’s mind, ‘

And stilling one’s desires one Merges (in the Lord). {J-Pause]

The Five Demons have beguiled the world.

The self-willed are Blind ; they know not the Lord’s Essence.

He, whose mind is turned God-wards, keeps his Home,

And, through the Word, destroys the Five Demons, [2]

The God-wards are Imbued ever with the True Lord's Love ;

They Worship the Master, the natural way, satiated by Him day and night.

And, on Meeting the Spouse, they Praise the True One

And gather Glory at the Lord’s Door. [3]

First, the One Lord Created Himself :

Second, the sense of Duality, and third the three-phased Maya ;

The fourth State, the highest, is (of Bliss) and is reached by the God-wards ; for, they Practise nothing
but the Truth. /4/

All is True that is pleasing to the True One :

They, who Realised the Truth, Merged in the Truth.

The God-wards Served the True One,

And Merged in His Truth. [5/

Without the True One, there is not another ;

In Jove with Duality, the world is destroyed,

He, whose mind is turned towards the Guru, knows the One alone and so gathers Bliss, [6]

All Thy Creation, O Lord, seeks Thy Refuge,

And putting Thy creatures down (on the Chess-Board), Thou See-est (amongst them) the imperfect and
the perfect chess-men.

Thou Thyself Engagest all ever in Thy Task ;

And Thou Thyself Unitest all with Thyself. £7]

Thou Thyself Unitest ; Thou Thyself See-est Thy Presence (in them).

Thou Thyself Pervadest all.

Thou Thyself Doest all,

But this the God-wards alone know. [8-6-7]

Majh M. 3

Sweet is the Nectar-Name of the Lord,
But rare is the one who Tastes the Word ;
Into him comes Light, and he Drinks the Great Essence,
And, at the True Gate, Sings the Word. [J]
Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I unto those
Who fix their minds on the Guru's Feet.
The True Guru is the Pool of Nectar,
For, it washes off the Dirt of the mind, [J-Pause]
O True One, Thy limits are known to no one.
Rare is the one, who fixes his mind on Thee, by the Guru's Grace.
Iam satiated not howsoever much I Praise Thee ;
So much is my Hunger for Thy True Name. /2/
I see the One alone, not another ;
And, by the Guru's Grace Drink Thy Nectar ;
_ Through the Guru's Word I Quench my Thirst,
And Merge in Peace, the natural way. [3]
They discard the Jewel like straw,
For, the self-willed are Blind, being attached to Duality
They reap only what they sow ;
And get not Peace even in their dream. [4]
He, on whom is His Mercy, Attains to Him,
And the Guru's Word Dwells in his mind ; F114
Night and day, he abides in (the Lord's) Fear,
And destroying (other) fears, dispels his Illusion. /3/
He, who dispels his Illusion, gets Eternal Peace,
And, by the Guru's Grace, Attains tO the State of Bliss.
His innerself is Pure ; Pure is his Werd,
And he Sings the Lord's Praise the natural way. [6]

2290 Buru-Granth Salih

Page 15
He reads the Smritis, the Shastras, and the Vedas,

(But), deluded by Illusion, he knows not the Essence ;

And attains not Peace, without Serving the True Guru :

And he earns nothing but Wee. [7]

When, He the Lord, doth all by Himself ; whom shall we go to complain ?

And grumble one may if He were ever to err.

He Himself doth everything and causes everything to be done,

So, Nanak, Merge thou in His Name through (contemplation of ) the Name, [8-7-3]

Majh M. 3

One is Imbued with His Love the natural way by the Lord Himself.
Through the Guru's Word is the mind Dyed in the Lord’s Colour ;

And one's body and mind are sated, and one's tongue becomes a flame of red like the Lalla flower,
And the Love-in-Fear of the Lord fills one’s being. [J]

Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am T unto those who gather-in their minds the Fearless Lord.
By the Guru's Grace, one Meditates on the Fearless He ;

And through the Word one Swims across the treacherous Sea of Existence. [J-—Pause]
The self-willed wretches try to play clever ;

They bathe and wash themselves, but are accepted not (as True).

They come and go (in vain) and in Sin do they Grieve. [2]

The self-willed Blind (creatures) know not a thing.

Death is in their Destiny, but they know it not,

The self-willed do (good) deeds, but attain not to the State of Bliss.

And, without the (Lord's) Name, they lose their life in vain. [3/

The true deed is to Know the Essence of the Word,

And, through the Perfect Guru, to find the Door to Salvation ;

Arid, to hear the Guru's Voice in the Word day and night,

And be Imbued with the Colour of the True One. f4/

The tongue, replete with the Lord’s Essence, brings its own reward,

And one’s mind and body are bewitched spontaneously by the Lord.

And, the Beloved Spouse, one finds the natural way

And the natural way one Merges in the Great Peace, [5]

He, in whom is Love, sings of the Virtues of the Lord,

And, through the Guru's Word, Merges in the Great Peace, the natural way.
Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I ever to those

Who Dedicate their minds to the Service of the Guru. [6]

The True One is Pleased only with the Truth,

And, one's heart is steeped in His Love by the Guru’s Grace.

One abides in the True Abode and Sings the Lord’s Praise,

Thus doth God make one accept His Truth. [7]

He, on whom is His Grace, Receives (the Name),

And, by the Guru's Grace, his Ego departs :

Into ‘his mind comes the Lord's Name,

And he, Nanak, is Acclaimed at the Door of the True Lord. [8-8-9]

Majh M, 3

Serve thou the True Guru : in it is thy greatest Glory :

And gather-in thy mind thy Dear Lord, the natural way?.

The Lord is the fruitful Tree :

He, who Drinks the Nectar thereof, is eternally satiated. / i]
Sacrifice, © Sacrifice am I to Him,

Who Unites me with the Society of the Holy.
He the Lord Unites me with the Holy, and ] Utter the Praises of the Lord. /J--Pause]

Serve .you the True Guru, through the Beauteous Word, P. 115
Yea, him who wrought into the mind the Name of the Lord ;

For, the Pure Lord Purge thee of thy dirt of Ego,

And you are Acclaimed at the True Gate. 2]

i, “fez (eft): Lir, without worry.
Guru-Granth Salih 9999992999999999999999009999999999990009999900

SAMEBEECCESCOCSSSAOSCEOCEOCEEERECECEESEERECIPLAESOAECEQBR@GRCACEaAC

Page 15
Without the Guru, one finds not the (Lord's) Name ;

The seekers and the adepts but wail in vain.

Without the Guru's Service, one pets no Peace,

And, one attains to the Guru, by true Destiny alone. 3]

The mind is the mirror, but into it iook only they whose minds are turned God-wards ;
And it gets not rusted’, if one burns down one's Ego.

Through the Pure Word Rings the Unstruck Melody (in the mind);
Yea, through the Guru’s Word doth one Merge in the (Lord's) Truth. [4]
Without the True Guru, one Secs not the Lord,

And when the Guru is in Mercy, he makes one See (the Unseen).

He, of Himself, is United with our Self,

And, imperceptibly, we Merge in the Peace* of Poise. [5]

The God-wards are in Communion with the One alone,

And, through the Guru’s Word, still their sense of Duality.

Within the body then the Trader Trades,

And Earns the Treasure of the (Lord's) True Name. [6]

The God-wards Practise the Purest deed of the Lord's Praise,

And they thus attain to the Door of Deliverance ;

Night and day, they are Imbued with His Love and Sing of His Virtues,
And them the Lord Calls into His Presence. /7/

The True Guru is Met by the Lord’s Grace,

And, by True Destiny, is the Word Enshrined within ws ;

And we are Blest with the Glory of the (Lord's) Name.

And so we Sing the Praises of the Lord. /8-9-J0}

Majh M. 3

He, who loses his self, attains all he yearns for ;

And, through the Guru's Word, énters into true Communion with the Lord.

He gathers Truth and Deals in nothing but Truth. /7/

Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I to the Lord,

Whose Praises, night and day, I Sing.

Thou art mine, O Master, and I Thine ;

Throngh Thy Word is my Glory. /J-Pause]

Blessed, blessed, is the time,

When I came to Love the True One ;

And by Serving the (Lord’s) Truth attain True Glory.

Yea, we attain the Truth through the Guru's Grace. [2]

Through the Mercy of the Guru, one Receives the fare of Love,

And, one loses one’s taste for every other taste,

And Enshrines the Essence of the Lord in the mind,

And one Receives Truth, Contentment anc the Great Peace, through the Word of the Perfect Guru, /3/
He, who Serves not the True Guru, is an ignorant and Blind fool :

How can then he attain to the Door of Deliverance 7

He is born only to die, yea, to come and go and suffer at the Fama's door. [4]
He, who recognises the Taste of the Word, Knows himself,

And, knows too that the Lord’s Word alone is Pure ;

And, by Serving the True One, he gets Eternal Peace,

And Cherishes the nine Treasures of the (Lotd’s) Name in the mind. [3/
Blessed is the place which Pleases Thee, O Lord ;.

(That alone is) the Holy congregation where Thy Praises are Sung,

And, Thou, O True Lord, are Worshipped,

And Thy Celestial Music is heard, /6/

The self-willed have False capital stock, they put up a false show. P. 1i6€
They practise Falsehood and suffer great Pain.

Deluded by Doubt, their mind wanders,

And they lose their lives in coming and going. [7/

1. Hae (alear) : (Persian), rust.
2. For Hola advefed (age ayfa aerafrar) ; Lit. through poise (Afgg) he mergeth in the (Lord's) Poise.

Sp) Cl) Guru-Granth Subib

Page 15
My True Master is dear to me, ;
For, so has the Word of the Perfect Guru instructed me.

Nanak : he who attains the Glory of the (Lord's) Name,
Looks upon pain and pleasure alike. /8-JO-J1]

Majh M, 3

Thine are (the four) sources of creation, Thine the words they speak.
Without Thy Name all are deluded by Doubt.

Through the Guru’s Service, I Received the Lord’s Name :

Nay, no one has found it without the True Guru. [J]

Sacrifice am | unto those

Who fix their minds on the Lord.

The True Lord we Attain through Devotion to the Guru,

And into the mind comes He, the natural way. /J-—Pause/

He, who Serves the True Guru, Receives all he longs for :

As is His wish, so is he Fulfilled ;

The True Guru is the fountain-head of all Blessings :

(But) one Mects him if one’s Destiny be True. [2]

The mind is soiled ; it Meditates not on the One ;

Within one is the Dirt of Duality ;

The egoist repairs to river-banks, holy places and different lands,
And gathers more and more the Dirt of selfhood. /3/

If he Serves the True Guru, his Dirt departs :

His self dies even while he’s alive and he fixes his mind on the Lord :
The Lord is the only Pure Being, for the Truth gathers not Dirt,
And by taking to the Truth, Untruth departs. /4/

Without the Guru, it is utter Darkness,

The Ignorant one is Blind ; for him it is stark Dark.

The Worms of Filth abide in Filth and eat Dirt ; -

And, by Filth they are enveloped again. [5]

if one Serveth the Emancipated soul, one is also Emancipated ;

And, through the Word, departs the love of T-amness ;

And one Serves one’s Dear and the True Lord, night and day,

By Meeting the Guru, through perfect Destiny. /6/

He Himself Forgives and Unites with Himself,

Through the Perfect Guru, one Receives the Treasure of the Name ;
He who Dwelis on the True Name, his mind becomes Holy,

And by Serving Truth, one’s Sorrow is driven away. [7]

He is present all the time before thee ; think Him not to be distant and far:
And, through the Guru’s Word, recognise the Lord in thy inmost Self.
Nanak : through the Name one Receives Glory,

And through the Perfect Guru one Receives the Lord’s Name. /8~Ji-J2]

Majh M, 3

He, who is True here, is True Hereafter too ;

The True mind is imbued with the True Word ;

He, who Serves the Truth, Practises the (Lord's) Truth,
And Earns he nothing but the Truth. [J]

Sacrifice, © Sacrifice am I unto those

Who Enshrine the True Name in their hearts,

And Serve the True One and Merge in Him,

And Sing the Praises of the True One. /J-Pause/

The Pundit reads the sacred texts but relishes not their taste,
(For), his mind is fixed on Maya and it wanders in Duality ;
In the love of Maya he has lost his mind,

And by Sinning has come to Grief. [2]

GurnGranth Sabb O9992ESsoo00R0o00000¢

Page 15
[ 108 J

Meeting with the True Guru, one Knows the Essence

And one hugs the Lord’s Name to one’s mind ; P. 117
And, one dies in the Word and slays his Ego :

And Attains he to the Door of Deliverance. [7]

He washes his Sins, and dispels his anger ;

Yea, he who keeps the Guru's Word in his heart.

He, who is Imbued with the Truth, is ever Detached,

And by stilling his Ego is United with the Lord. [4]

Within us is the Jewel, but we Receive it only if the Lord so Wills ;

Else, we are gripped by the Three Modes and swayed by the three-faced! Maya.
The Pundits and the men of silence are tired of reading their Texts,

But they know not the state of the Fourth State. /5]

The Lord, of Himself, Dyes thee in His Love,

But he alone is in His Love who is Imbued with the Word ;

He takes to the Glorious’ Colour of the Lord,

And Sings the Praises of the Lord with Love. /6/

For the God-wards, He alone is the Miracle, (His Way) the True ascetic discipline ;
All Wisdom for him is in the Lord’s Name, as also Deliverance,

And so he Practises the (Lord's) Truth and Merges in the Truth. [7/

For the God-ward, the Lord alone Creates and Destroys.

For the God-ward, the Lord alone is his Caste, his Honour.

Nanak : the God-wards Dweil on the Lord’s Name,

And, through the Name, Merge in the Name’, /8-/2-/3]

Maj M. 3

Through the Word is the Creation and the Dissolution (of the universe).
Through the Word is the Evolution of Creation again ;

The God-wards know that the Truc one Works alone ;

And, Creating, Merges all He in Himself. [TJ

Sacrifice am I unto those who Enshrine the Perfect Guru in their hearts.
Through the Guru, they are in Peace and Worship the Lord, day and night,
And, Praising Him, Merge in His Praise. {/-Pause]

Towards God‘ turn the earth, the water, the air, and the fire that work miracles ;
(But), he who is denied the Guru's Grace, is born to die again, and over again. [2]
The Lord has staged the Play (of Existence)

And put in the body all that one seeks.

Through the Word one finds the Mystery,

And one is ushered into the Lord’s Presence. [3/

True is the Lord ; True are the Traders ;

Through the Love of the Guru, they Deal in Truth ;

They invest the Truth and earn the Profit of Truth,

(For), from Truth always comes the yield of Truth. [47]

How can one earn a profit without investment 7

The Egocentrics are all deiuded ;

They earn no Profit, and go empty-handed, and so they suffer Pain. [5]
Some there are who Deal in the Truth,

Through the Love of the Werd.

They themselves Serve their Lord, and so Save all their kins .

Approved is their coming (into the world),

And, Meeting their Lord, they abide in Peace. [6/

The Thing is within himself but the fool searches for it without ;

The self-willed one gropes like a blind demon :

And, where there is the Thing, he searches not,

For, he is deluded by Doubt. ./7/]

1, fafefq (fafafir) : Liv, of three ways (/.e., Gunas or modes).
2. nif orurgt (aft argrer) ; Lic, limitless,
3. Cf. “By Self, he enters Self." (Mundikopanishad i, 12); (meqreqreNPTTReNT fa: ETAT 113-211).

4. aeufu cael gant wed (qeyfa weft qegfer grt) : The elements are termed “Gurmukh" (holy, sanctified
they act as is the Lord’s Will. t ) oly, sa ) as

BH CEASCHCHSCOOOECHSPOSOSCOGOGCE

2098099 Guru-Granth Salrib
Page 15
He, the Lord, of Himself Bestows the Word on His Bride,
And she attains to the Peace of the Bridal Chamber.
Nanak : through the (Lord's) Name, one gathers Glory,
And Hearing the Name, one Dwells on it. [8-13-14]

Majh M. 3

The True Guru has given thee True Instruction : P. 118
Dwell thou on the Lord that He be thy Support at the (other) end:

Yea, the Lord, who is Unknowable, Beyond Comprehension, without a peer,
Not cast into the womb, and Realised through the Love of the True Guru. [J]
Sacrifice am [ unto those who overcome their Ego,

And so find their Lord and Merge in the Great Peace. /{J--Pause]

One does the Deed that was Writ for one by God,

And, Serving the True Guru attains Eternal Peace.

Without True Destiny one finds not the Guru,

Yea, through the Word is the Lord Met. [2]

The God-wards remain Detached in the world,

And, through the Guru’s Support, lean only on the (Lord’s) Name.

He, who oppresses the man of God, is oppressed by his own Sin and writhes in Pain. [3]
The egotist is Blind; for his Conscience is Awakened not.

He is the Killer of himself and so also the Killer of the world,

He carries the load of slander; lo, without wages he carries his load, [4]
This world is a Garden; my Lord is the Gardener;

He Protects all, none goes away empty from His Door;

(But) as is the fragrance of a flower,

So alone is it known. /5/

The world walks in Ego and so it ails,

For it has abandoned the Giver of Peace, the Vast Unknowable;

The poor Wretch Yells and Wails,

But attains not Peace without the Guru, [6]

He, who Created men, He alone knows the Way;

If He so Wills, one Realises His Will :

Whatever He puts inside (of one) the same Way one goes,

And so is one known to the world outside. [7

Without Him, the True Onc, I know not another :

He, whom He takes to Himself, becomes Pure :

Within his heart is Enshrined the (Lord's) Name,

But he alone Receives it on whom is the Lord’s Grace. [8-J4-15]

Majh M. 3

J Enshrine in my heart the Nectar-Name of the Lord,

And [ shed my Ego and therewith all my Sorrow,

I Praise the Nectar-Word

And so Drink the (Lord’s) Nectar ever. [J]

Sacrifice am I unto those who Enshrine the Nectar-Name in their minds
And Dwell on the Nectar-Name. /J-—Pause]

One speaks then the Nectar-Name with the tongue :

He looks with his eyes on the Sweet (Name);
He Utters the Nectar-Gospel of the Lord, day and night,

And makes the others Hear. [2]

He, who is Imbued with the Lord’s Nectar-Love, is in Communion with the Lord;
He Receives the Nectar by the Guru's Grace;

From his tongue rains nothing but Nectar, day and night,

And his body and mind are satiated with the Nectar-Name. [3]

The Lord does what one cannot predict;

His Will not one can challenge.

By His Will is one Blest with the Nectar-Word,

And by His Will do we Taste its Taste. [4]

Guru-Granth Sahib 9999999999099999999999999999999999999002099990090"

PABESCECECOSSSSSSOCCOSEBSSCOSOESACBASACEE FB SEECHSSSCOCSSCSBSEESSSGSSC SES REOAARBROARRER

i

Page 15
Page 159

Wonderful are the works of the Lord ;

This mind is infected by [luston, and so it wanders about.
He, who fixes his mind on the Nectar-Word,

In him Rings the Music of the Word. /5/

Thou Thyself Created the True and the False, O Lord !
Thou Thyself Tested each (on Thy Touchstone)

The True ones Thou gatherest into Thy Treasure,

While the False ones wander about in Doubt. /6/

How may | See, how Praise (Thee, O Lord ')

By the Guru's Grace | Praise Thee, through the Word :
In Thy: Will Rains the Nectar upon us,

And im Thy Will do we Drink it. /7/

Neetar-Sweet is the Word, Oh Nectar-sweet is the Lord's Word ;
Serving the True Guru, it Abides in our heart.

It is the giver of Eternal Bliss,

And as we Drink jt, ali our Thirst is satiated. /8-/5-/6/

Majh M. 3

The (Lord’s) Nectar Rains the natural way;

But he alone, whose mind ts turned God-wards, Receives it.

And he, who Drinks it, is for ever Satiated

And all his desires are Quenched, by the Lord's Grace, {i}
Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I to the one

Who, by the Guru’s Grace, has Tasted the {Lord's} Nectar.

The tongue that Tastes it for ever remains in the Love of the Lord,
And Praises the Master, the natural way. //-Pause/

Rare is the one, who, by the Guru’s Grace, enters into the Great Peace ;
And stilling his Duality, fixes his mind on the One alone.

When the Lord is in Grace, one Sings His Praise,

And through His Grace one Merges in the Truth. /2/

Over all is Thy Grace, O Lord,

On some it is more, on others less.

Without Thee, nothing happens,

And, through the Guru, one becomes Wise in Thee. [3/

The Gad-wards Dwell on the Reality of the Real,

(And know) that Thy Treasures are full of Nectar ;

(But) without Serving the True Guru, one Receives not (the Nectar) :
By the Guru's Grace, one Attains (to the Lord). [4

He who Serves the True Guru, is Beauteous.

His inner mind is bewitched by the Nectar-Name,

His body and mind are Imbued with the Word,

And the Nectar-(Word) he Hears, the natural way. [5/

The egocentric is deluded and wasted away by Duulity,

He utteres not the (Lord’s) Name and poisons himself to death.

He abides, night and day, in Filth,

And, without (the Guru's) Service he wastes his life away. /6/
He, on whom is the Lord’s Mercy, Drinks Nectar.

And, by the Guru's Grace, enters imperceptibly into Communion with the Lord.

The Perfect Lord Pervades all,

But He is scen only through the Guru's Word. [7]

He, the Immaculaie One, ts all by Himself.

He alone Creates ; He alone Destroys ;

Nanak : gather-in thou the (Lord’s} Mame,

And Merge in the (Lord’s) Truth, the natural way. -/8-J6-I7]

Majh M. 3

They, whom Thou likest, Love Thy Truth,

They Dwell upon the Truth, the natural way ;

And Praise the True Lord, through the True Word,
And are United with the True One. [J/

P. 119
Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I

Unto these who Praise the True One.

They, who Dwell on the (Lord’s) Truth, are Imbued with it ;

And, they Merge init, in the end. /J-Pause/]

Wherever I See, 1 See the True One, ;

(And), by the Guru's Grace, He is Enshrined in my mind.

And my body becomes True, and my tongue is Imbued with the (Lord's) Truth,

And I hear and utter the Truth alone, [2]

He who stills his desires, Merges in the ‘Truth ; P, 120

He knows in his mind.that all else but comes and goes ;

By Serving the True Guru one's mind is held,

And abides one in one’s inner Home. [3]

Through the Guru’s Word, one finds the Lord in one's own heart ;

And, through the Word, one burns off one’s love of Maya ;

One Praises the Truce One and sees Him all over,

And Receives the Truth, through the Guru’s Word. [4/

They, who are. Imbued with the Truth, are in true Communion (with the Lord),

They are the Fortunate ones that Praise the Virtues of the True Cne.

Through the True Word are they United (with the Lord} and, in the Society of the Saints, Praise the
Lord of Truth. /3/

One may read the Lord's account, if He be describable ;

(Bot) He is Unknowable, Unfathomable, and is known only through the Word.

One can find His Value in no otherwise,

But only through His Praise, through the True Word, [6]

They, who but read (of Him), gather no peace,

They are consumed by Desire, their consciousness is deadened.

They trade in poison and crave for Maya and Lust,

And speak Falsehood and so they lick Poison. [7/

I know the One alone, by the Guru’s Grace ;

I kiil the Other and Merge in the Truth ;

Nanak : the One Name alone works within me,

{But) by the Guru's Grace is (the Lord's Name) Revealed to me. /8-17-18]

Se a sy

So

Si

Majh M., 3

Tn all forms, all colours, art Thou ;
Many, O many, are born to die again and over again.
Thou alone art the Eternal Unknowable,
And, through the Guru's Word, art Thou known, [J]
Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I unto the one
Who Cherishes the Lord's Name in his mind ;
He, who is beyond form, sign and colour,
And who, through the Guru’s Word, is Revealed, /{]-Pawse}
Know ye that in all js the Light of the One alone,
And, by the Service of the Guru, He becomes Manifest.
He alone is Manifest all over : Unmanifest is He too ;
And, in His Light is our light Merged. [2]
The world is being burnt by the Fire of Desire
And Greed and abundance of Ego ;
It comes and goes and loses Honour
And loses its life in vain. [3]
Rare is the one who knows the Guru’s Word, :
if one stills one’s Ego, one knows the three worlds ;
_ Then he dies not again, and Merges in the Truth the natural way. [4]
He fixes not his mind on Maya,
’ And, through the Guru’s Word, he Merges ever (in the Lord) ;
And he Praises the All-pervading Lord,
And, in Truth, he seems Beavteous. /3/
Praise thou the True One, the Eternal Presence,
Who Permeates the Guru's Word, through and through :
By the Guru's Grace is His Truth Revealed and, ons gathers Bliss through the Truth, [6]

Guru-Granth Sahih 999999920999999999992999999999 9999900279 99990090°

BOLOLSECE COSTOSE HBSCCOCCOSCOSEEOEECHOECER ESE EEEEESSESECESE

LS

1 Page 16
Page 161

The Truth abides for ever in the mind,

The Truth is ever eternal ; it comes nor goes ;

They, who take to the Truth, are for ever Pure in mind,

And, through the Guru’s Word, Merge in the Truth, {7/

Praise thou the Truth, and nought clse,

Serving which one attains Eternal Peace.

Nanak ; they, who are Imbued with the (Lord’s) Name, are Wise :
For, they practise nothing but (the Lord’s) Truth. /8-/8-I9/

Majh M, 3

Pure is the Word, Pure the (Guru's) Utterance ;

Pure is the Lord's Light which Pervades all ;

Pure is the Word in which is the Lord's Praise

Mediltating on which one Washes one’s Dirt off. /J/

Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I unto those

Who Enshrine in their minds the Gift of Poise :

Who Praise the Pure One through the Guru's Word,

And thus quench their (unquenchable) Thirst. /J-—Pause/
When the (Lord’s) Immaculate Name is Enshrined in the mind,
The body and mind become Pure ; anc departs one’s love of Maya ;
One Sings the Pure Praises of the True Lord ;

And the Celestial Music Rings within him. /2/

One finds the Immaculate Nectar from the Guru,

In whom the self is dead, and who has neither Lust nor love of Maya;
Pure is His Wisdom, Pure His Reflection ;

(For), the Pure Word Abides in His mind. /3/

He, who Serves the Pure One, becomes Pure,

He Washes off the Dirt of Ego with the Guru's Word.

In-him Rings the subtle Melody of the Unstruck Music,

And he gets Glory at the True Door. /4/

From the Pure One, flows all that is Pure,

The Pure mind weaves in itself the Word of the Lord :

Only to the Fortunate ones the (Lord’s) Name seems Pure,
And the Name makes them look Beauteous. /5/

He alone is Pure who looks Beauteous with the Word,

And whose body and mind the Immaculate Name has allured ;
And who gathers not the Dirt, being Merged in the True Name :
And whose Face is thus made Beauteous. /6/

The mind of man becomes Soiled on account of Dualit
Impure is his (Kitchen)-square, Impure his dwelling ;

He eats and recreates but Dirt, and is thus everin Pain. /7/
The Pure and the Impure ones are all in the Will of the Lord.
And, they alone are Pure with whom the Lord is Pleased.
Nanak : if the (Lord’s) Name Abides in the mind,

‘One is purged of one’s Dirt for ever. /8-19-20/

Majh M. 3

My Lord is (the Pool of ) Purity ; (the Awakened Souls) are in it like swans,
Whose thought and speech and desires are all Pure.

‘They Dwell on the Pure Name alone ;

And so their minds are Pure, and also their faces. [J]

Iam a Sacrifice unto him,

Who Sings the Praises of the Lord,

And utters nothing but the Name of Govind,

And Sings the Lord’s Praise through the Word. /J-Pause]

He, who Sings of Govind, the natural way, .

He, in the Fear of the Lord, becomes Pure,

And departs the Dirt of his Ego.

He remains for ever in Bliss and Worships the Lord day and night,
And Hears and Sings of His Praise alone. [2]

P. 121

SIDDOSIR090 Guru-Granth Sahib =.
Let the mind Dance, Wise-in-worsbip,
And keep the Measure as the Word Wills.
This is the True Step that one loses one's love of Maya ;
And as the Word directs, so does the mind Dance. [3]
If one screams aloud and waves one’s body about ;
But is attached to Maya, such a one is ever in the 'Yama's eyes ;
Dances he to the tune of Lust and Maya, and for his inner guile suffers Pain, [4] P.
Worship is that which the Devotee does as the Lord Wills,
And wherewith his body and mind aré Imbued (with His Love), the natural way.
In him Rings the Word and he Sings nothing but the Word ;
Such a Worship is Approved by the Lord. /5/
To dance in all kinds of measures, to play upon all kinds of tunes, (is vain).
For, no one hears such a jumble, nor can one Enshrine it in the mind ;
If one dances in the ring, allured by Maya,
Then Duality leads him to Sorrow. = [6/
He, in whom is (the Lord's) Love, is Redeemed.
He masters his sex, and the discipline of Truth is his Way of life ;
And, through the Guru's Word, he Dwells ever on the Lord
This is the Worship that Pleases my Lord. [7/
This Guru-given Worship (of the Lord) is True through the four ages ;
Through no other Worship is the Lord Attained ;
Nanak : one gathers the (Lord’s) Name through Devotion to the Guru,
And by fixing one’s mind on the Guru’s Feet. /8-20-2/) - : z .
Majh M. 3 : b

Serve thou the True One ; Praise thou Him alone ; 5 v
(For), with the True Name within one, one comes not to Pain. :
He, who Serves the Giver of Peace, gathers Peace,
And Enshrines the Guru's Wisdom in his mind. /J}
Sacrifice am I unto those
Who enter into the trance of Poise, the natural way.
They, who Serve the Lord, are ever Beauteous,
They gather Glory and their Intuition is Pure. /{J--Pause]
Everyone calls himself Thy Devotee, O Lord,
But he alone is, with whom Thou art Pleased,
And, who Praises Thee through the True Word,
And, Imbued with Thee, Dwells on Thee alone. [2] .
All, my Dear Lord, belong to Thee. -
When one Meets the one Wise-in-God,
One's comings and goings cease.
When Thou Willest, Thou makest one Merge in Thy Name,
And Thou Thyself makest men Dwell upon Thee. /{3/
Through the Guru’s Word do Thy Devotees Enshrine Thee in their minds,
And lose all sense of attachment ; and pain and pleasure (are alike to them),
They enter ever into Communion with Thee alone,
And Enshrine Thy Name in their minds, /4/
Thy Devotees are Imbued with Thy Love and are ever in Joy ;
Within them are Enshrined the nine Treasures of Thy Name ,
By True Destiny have they met the True Guru,
And, through His Word, have they Met Thee, their Lord. /3/
Thou art our Lord, the Merciful, the ever-Giver of Peace ;
Thou Thyself Unitest me with Thee ; through the Guru art Thou known.
Thou Thyself Blessest all with the Glory of Thy Name,
And, Imbued with Thy Name, we abide in Peace. /6/
Ever, O ever, I Praise Thee, O Thou True One :
Through the Guru, I know that there is none other but Thou.
And, my mind is Merged m Thee, the One alone,
And with the mind's acceptance of Thee, with Thee my Mind communes, {7]
The God-wards Praise Thee alone, O Lord,
Thou who art Care-free, and our True Master.

' ‘Nanak : when the (Lord’ 's) Is-ness! comes into the mind,

» (One is United with the Lord, through the Guru's Word. [8-21- 22]

1, Lit, the Name.

Guru-Granth Suhib 9909922999999099099999922099999999909002999090090

Page 162
{ 114 ]

Majh M. 3

The Devotees look Beauteous in Thy Court, O Lord !

Throwgh the Guru’s Word, (which enshrines) Thy Name, they are Decked.
They abide in Bliss for ever,

And, Praising Thee, their Beauteous Lord, they Merge in Thee. /J/
Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I unto those P, 123
Who Hear the (Lord's) Name and Enshrine it in their minds ;

And shedding their Ego. Merge in the True One,

Who is the Highest of the high. {J-Pause]

My Dear Lord is True ; True is His Name:

But, rare is the one who Attains unto Him by the Guru’s Grace,

And is then separated not,

And Merges in His Truth, the natural way. [2]

Nothing is beyond Thee, © Lo rd,

Thou alone Doest and See-est and Knowest Thy Doings ;

Thou alone Doest and Makest others do:

And, through the Guru’s Word art Thou Met. /3/

The Bride of Merit finds her Spouse,

For she Decks herself with the Love-in-Fear of the Lord,

And, Serving the True Guru, belongs for ever to her Lord,

And so she Merges in the True Wisdom (of the Guru). /4/

They, who forsake the Word, get no Peace,

And are deluded by Illusion, like the crow ina ruin ;

They lose this world and the next,

And pass their days in utter Sorrow. /3/

Writing (of Him), our Lord, one exhausts the paper, (and) the ink,

For, no one can find Peace in Duality.

They, who write and practise and fix their minds on Falsehood,

Are cast into the fire.

The God-wards write of Truth alone,

And so Mount to the Gate of Salvation ;

True is the paper, the ink, the pen, that write (only) of the Truth :

(For), by so doing one Merges in the True One. [7]

My Master Sits within (me) and Sees (all),

He, whom He Meets, through the Guru's Grace, is alone of any account ;
And he, Nanak, attains the Glory of the (Lord’s) Name from the Perfect Guru, [8-22-23]

Majh M. 3

The Lord's Light that Pervades all, Shines forth in one’s mind, through the Guru's Grace.
The Dirt of one’s Ego goes through the Guru's Word.

His mind becomes Pure and, day and night. he is Imbued with the Lord’s Worship ;
And by so doing, he Attains tothe Lord. [J]

I am a Sacrifice unto those

Who Worship and make others Worship their Lord.

I salute such Devotees ever and for evermore

Who Realise their Lord through Worship. [{/—Pause/

He, the Lord, Himself Doeth all,

And Yokes us to the tasks as is His Will.

If one's Destiny be True, one Serves the Guru,

And through Service one attains Bliss. /2]

He, who stills his Ego, lives in and Attains (to the Lord),

And, by the Guru's Grace, Enshrines the Lord in his mind,

And is thus Redeemed and Merges the natural way in the Peace of Poise. /3/
Man does many (pious) deeds, but gets not Deliverance ;

He wanders from place to place, lost in Duality ;

Vain is the life of the Deceiver,

For, without the Word, he comes to Grief. [4]

He, who holds his wandering mind,

Altains to the highest State (of Bliss).

The True Guru himself Unites him with the Lord,

And, Meeting with the Lord, one attains Peace. [3]

GB CRASS CSSSSSOSIS SESH ICCCOSOCOSCSSCHCESOCECOGE

Page 16
Some take to Falschood and carn Falsehood too ;
And waste away their lives in Duality .

They drown themselves and also their kindreds,
For, by uttering Falsehood, they eat Poison, [6/

Only the God-wards look into the mind within the body, P, 124
And Worship the Lord with Love and their Ego evaporates.

‘The adepts, the seekers, the men of silence, all concentrate their minds,

Hut examine not the mind in the body. /7/

He, the Creator, Makes us work in His Will :

For not another can accomplish what He can.

Nanak : on whomsoever He Bestows His Name,

Into his mind Comes (the Lérd). { 8-23-24]

Majh M. 3

Within the cave (of the mind) is an inexhaustible Treasure :

Within it Resides the Unknowable, Infinite, He

Who Himself is Manifest, Unmanifest.

Through the Guru's Word, one loses one's Epo (and Knows Him). [J]
Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am 1 unto those

Who Enshrine the Nectar-Name in their minds, the highest Bliss ; :

To them the Nectar-Name tastes sweet,

For, through the Guru’s Word, doth the Lord Himself bring it unto them. [JI-Pause]
The Lord stills our Ego and opens unto us the Hard Door!,

And we Receive the (Lord? *s) Priceless Name by the Guru's Grace.
Without the Word, the Name is not Revealed to one,

By the Guru's Grace is it Enshrined in the mind. /2/

When J applied the unguent of the Guru’s Wisdom to my eyes,

Into me came (the Lord’s) Light and the Darkness of Ignorance was dispelled.
And my light Merged in the All-light, and my mind was in Ecstasy,

And I was Blest with Glory at the Lord's Door. /3/

If one goes out of oneself to seek (the Lord's Name),

He receives not the Name and is forced to suffer Pain.

The self-willed Ignorant one knows not,

And attains unto the Thing on coming back Home, through the Guru’s Door. [4/
By the Guru's Grace, one Attains to the True Lord,

And looks into the mind, within his body, and the Dirt of his Ego departs,
And, joining the Society of the Holy, he Receives the Lord's Praise.

And Merges in the True Word, [3]

He, who closes his nine Doors* and holds his wandering mind,

And enters through the Tenth Door into himself,

Hears he, day and night, the Unstruck Music of the Word,

Through the Guru's Instruction, /6/

Without the Word, the innerself is deep-dark,

One Receives not the Thing and ends not his Round,

In the.hands of the Guru is the Key,

And none else can open the Door (of the Mind) ;

By True Destiny is the Guru Met.

Thou art the Subtle and the Apparent, all over, O Lord,

By the Guru's Grace do T Receive this Wisdom :

Nanak : Praise thou ever the Name :

And Enshrine it in thy heart, by the Guru's Grace. /&-24-25] |

Majh M. 3

Through the Guru, one Meets with the Lord,

(But), the Guru is Met with by the Lord’s Grace.

Then Death eyes not the man,

And he suffers no Sorrow,

He stills his Ego and breaks off all his Shackles,

And, by the Guru's Grace, looks Beauteous, Decked with the Lord's Word. [J]

' 1. he. the tenth door of the mind.
2. Le. sense-organs.

Page 16
{ 116 ]

Sacrifice am I unto those

Who look Beauteous, Embellished with the Lord's Name.

They Sing the Word, dance the Guru's Word,

And fix their minds on the Lord alone. [J-Pause]

The God-wards are Approved in life as in death,

Their life is wasted not away, for they Realise the Word.

They Die not, nor time eats them away r
And they Merge for sooth in the (Lora’ 's) Truth. [2] P. 125
They are crowned with Glory at the Lord’s Door,

By smothering their Ego.

They themselves Swim aga i make others follow,

And so their life is Blest.

The God-wards ail not in the S) ody,

For, their Pain of T-amness dears.

Their minds are Pure and get not Soiled,

And they Merge in the Peace of Poise. /4/

The God-wards Receive the Glory of the (Lord's) Name,

And Sing the Lord’s Praises and are Blest.

They remain eternally in Bliss,

For, they practise the Word, night and day. /3/

They are Imbued with the Word for ever :

And are known through the four Ages.

They utter ever the Pure Praise of the Lord,

And, through the Word, Worship they (their God). [6]

Without the Guru, it is deep Dark

And, gripped by the Yama. men scream (in Distress).

Their minds are affiicted with Disease,

And, like worms, they abide in Filth and Suffer. [7]

The God-wards (know) that the Lord alone is the Doer and the Cause,
Upon their hearts rains (the Mercy of) the Lord.

Nanak : through the Perfect Guru, one is Blest with Glory of the (Lord's) Name. [8-25-26]

Majh M. 3

In all lights is the Light of the One alone;
Through the Word is it Revealed to us by the Perfect Guru.
Within our hearts the sense of separateness is also His ;
And to the Union also we attain through Him,
Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I unto those
Who Dwell on the Praises of the True One.
ithout the Guru, one attains not equipoise,
It is through the Guru that we Merge in the Great Peace. /J]-Pause]
Thou Thyself lookest Beauteous and enticest the world away, O Lord ;
Into Thy Grace dost Thou weave the universe ;
Thou Thyself Givest pain and pleasure.
(But), Thou art Seen through the Guru’s Grace. [2]
The Lord Himself is the Doer and the Cause :
He Himself makes the Word to be Enshrined in one’s heart.
From the Word is produced the Nectar-Name,
Which the God-wards recite to the others. 3)
He Himself is the Creator and the Enjoyer :
And breaks our Fetters off, yea, He the Emancipator.
He, the True One, is Himself for ever Emancipated,
And He Himself makes us know the Unknowable He. [4]
He Himself is Maya ; He Himself the Illusion ;
He Himself Created attachment in the world.
He Himself is the Giver of Virtue, He Himself who Sings His Virtues,
And He Himself who makes the others hear (His Praise). {5}
He Himself Does, and makes others do,
He Himself Creates ; He Himself Destroys.
Without Him, the Lord, nothing happens :
He Himeelf has Engaged all in His works. /6]

GS GOASSCSSOOSS SSS SEDC OSCCOSSCHSCOCHSCOSHGECOCS

Page 16
He Himself brings life and death ;
He Himself Unites us with Himself ;
We attain Eternal Bliss through His Service,
And Merge in the Peace of Poise, [7]
He Himself is the Highest of the high,
teat) he alone Sees Him whom He Himself Blesses.
anak : when the (Lord's) Name Abides in the heart,
The Lord Makes us See it and to others Reveal, [8-26-27] ° P. 126

Majh M. 3

My Lord Pervades all places, all hearts :

By the Guru's Grace, I found Him (also) within myself.

Now, single-mindedly, I Meditate on Him,

And, by the Guru's Grace, Merge in True One. [I]

Sacrifice am I unto those who Enshrine in their minds the Life of all life.
The Life-giving Fear-free Lord is ever Beneficent :

Through the Guru's Word is one Merged in the Peace of Equipoise. {J-Pause]
Within thy home, O man, is the earth, the (supporting) Bull, the underworld,
In thy home is the Lord, the Ever-young.

He, the Giver of Peace, Abides in Eternal Bliss :

And, by the Guru's Grace, thou Mergest in the All-Peace. [2]

If within thee is I-amness,

Then, thy coming and going cease not :

He, whose face is turned God-wards, stills his Ego,

And Meditates on the (Lord's) Truth alone. /[3/

Within. the body abide Virtue and Sin—the twin brothers,

And within their limits works the whole universe :

But he, who rises above both?,

And brings back his mind to its only Home,

Merges in the Great Peace, by the Guru's Grace, “[4]

Within the home is Darkness, caused by Duality,

But when there is Light, one sheds the (Darkness of ) I-amness.

The Word manifests itself in Bliss,

And one Meditates on the (Lord's) Name, night and day. [3]

With His Light within us the Lord seems’Manifest in the whole Expanse,
And, through the Guru's Instruction, our Darkness is dispelled ;

And our Lotus blossoms forth, and we find Eternal Peace,

And our light Merges in the All-light. /6)

Within the ‘castle’ (of the human body) are the Treasures of Jewels.
Through the Guru one Receives them: (these are the Lord's) Infinite Name.
The (true) Traders Trade through the Guru,

And earn ever the Profit of the (Lord's) Name. [7]

He Himself Keeps the Thing : He Himself Gives ;

But rare is the one who Deals in it, by the Guru's Grace,

Yea, through the Guru’s Grace,

Is the Lord Enshrined in the mind. [8-27-28]

‘ Majh M. 3

The Lord Himself Unites thee (with Himself),

And makes thee Serve (Him) ;

And, through the Guru's Word, the Duality departs.
The Lord is ever Pure, ever Giver of Merit, .

And He Himself Makes one Merge in His Truth. [J]

Sacrifice am I unto those

Who Enshrine the True Lord in their hearts.

The True Name is ever Pure, .
Through the Guru’s Word, it is embedded in the mind. /J-Pause]

1. Thisis mot to suggest that one should discard virtue as one discards sin. This only means that one should rise
above human standards of the so-called virtue and sin, both born of ego and the social circensstemces of a given age, and act
attuned to the eternal laws as enshrined in the Word.

*PPBALOCCECHOOGHSHSOP GHOSE OESOCAPOCCECECE CE SESECOSOSEECOEGERS

g
b
3
2

Page 16
Page 167

He Himself is the Beneficent (Lord),

The Maker of our Destiny ;

Through Service of the Guru we know the Master.

And, the Nectar-Name then looks Beauteous,

And, through the Guru’s Word, we Taste the Taste of the Real. /2/
Within the Cave (of the body) is a Beauteous Seat,

Through the True Guru is the Doubt dispelled,

And we recite, night and day, the (Lord's) Name in His Love,

And Receive within us the Lord, by the Guru's Grace. [3]

Through the Guru's Word, Iet one search this Cave ;

And find the [mmaculate Name of the Lord which Abides in it ;

And, through the Beauteous Word, recite the Lord's Praise,

And Unite within oneself with the Beloved in Peace. [4/

The Yama taxes those deluded by Duality ;

And punishes those who forsake the (Lord's) Name ;

One has to account for every little time, for every grain (of action). /5]
The would-be Bride who remembers not the Lord in her Mother's house,
Js cheated by Duality and Wails grievously ;

She, verily, is from a low home, ugly and vile,

And meets not her Lord even in dream. [6]

(But) she, who Enshrines her Master in the mind at her Parents’ home,
Her the Perfect Guru brings face to face with the Lord :

She Hugs the Spouse to her Bosom,

And, through the Word, enjoys his Luxurious Couch, /7/

He, the Lord Himself, calls us out to Bliss,

And Makes us Enshrine His Name in our mind ;

And so, Nanak, we gather Glory,

‘And, night and day, Sing the Lord’s Praise. /8-28-29)

Majh M. 3

Blessed are their lives, blessed is the place they abide in,
Who Serve the True Guru and remain Detached, even in the household ;
And are Imbued with the Lord’s Love,

And are satiated in mind with the Reality of the Real. [J]
Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am I unto those

_ Who Read of, and Know, and Enshrine the Lord in their minds.

The God-wards Read and Praise the Lord’s Name,

And are Honoured at the Lord's True Door. /J-Pause/
He, the Unknowable, the Mysterious, Pervades all ;
Through no effort (of ourselves) can we Attain to Him :
Through His Grace, do we meet the Guru,

And, by his Grace, are we United with the Lord. /2/
One who reads in Duality, knows not (the One)

And the Three Modes of Maya make him yelp.

But, the Fetters of the Three Modes are broken,

If one Dwells on the Guru's Word,

And one is Emancipated. /3]

This mercurial mind comes not into our grip,

It has taken to Duality and wanders about in ten directions ;
And, like a worm eating dirt,

It rots itself away thus. [4

Man says, ‘I am-—TI am’, and tries to impress ;

Many works he does, but nothing avails ;

(For), without Thee, O Lord, nothing happens,

-And*Thou alone Forgivest through Thy Beautcous Word, [5]

He is born, and he dies, but Knows not (the Reality),
And wanders about in Duality, night and day :

The life of the egocentric is thus wasted away,

And he grieves and regrets in the end. /6]

P, 127

20 Guru-Granth Sahib
The Blind self-willed creature behaves

Like a woman decking herself while her spouse is out,

And attains not Glory here, nor Refuge Hereafter,

And wastes thus his life away. [7]

Rare is the one Who knows the Lord's Name,

And to whom, through the Perfect Guru's Word, is He the Lord Revealed ;
And who Worships Him, night and day,

He attains Peace the natural way. /@/

He, the Lord, Pervades all ;

But rare the God-wards who Realise (the Truth) ;

Nanak : they, who are Imbued with the (Lord's) Name, are Beauteous,
And, by His Grace, are United with their Lord, [9-29-30]

be

Majh M. 3
The egocentric reads and is called a Pundit,
But, torn by Duality, he suffers grievous Pain iP. 128
Intoxicated by Maya, he knows not the Real,
And comes and goes again and again. /J/
Sacrifice am I unto those,
Who overcome their Ego and Unite with the Lord,
In whose mind is Enshrined the Master,
And who Taste the Great Essence. [{/-Pause ]
By reading the Vedas, they Taste not the Real.
Lured by Maya, they discourse on dissent :
They, who revel in Ignorance, are for ever in Darkness.
Through the Guru alone, one Knows and Sings of the Lord. /2]
One utters the Unutterable through the Beauteous Word :
Through the Guru's Instruction, the mind Relishes the (Lord's) Truth:  -
And utters the Truth alone, day and night, and is Imbued with the True One. [3/
They, who are Imbued with the Truth, like nothing but the Truth ;
The Lord who Bestows (this Gift) on us regrets it not ; ‘
Through the Guru’s Word do we know the Truth, ;
And, by Uniting with the True One, we attain to Peace and Poise, /4/
The Dirt of Falsehood sticks not to them, .
Who, by the Guru's Grace, keep (their minds) Awake, day and night.
Into their hearts Abides the (Lord's) Immaculate Name,
And their light Merges in the Alllight. [5]
They, who work within the Three Modes and know not the Quintessence of the Lord,
Are lost to the Real, for they know not the Guru's Word.
They are attached te Attachments and realise not its futility.
They Attain to the Lord (only) through the Guru's Word. /6/
The Vedas say : ‘Maya has three attributes’,
The self-willed know it not, deluded by Duality.
They fall for the Three Modes and Know not the One,
And, Knowing not, they come to Grief. [7/
When the Lord Wills, He Unites us with Himself ;
And, by the Guru’s Grace, Cures us of the Disease of Doubt,
Nanak / the Name alone brings True Glory,
And, Believing in the Name, one attains Peace. /3--30-377

Majh M. 3

He, the Lord, is the Gne Absolute, He the One Related.

(And), he alone is the Pundit who knows the Quintessence (of the Lord).
| He Swims across himself and Saves all his kindreds,

And Enshrines in his heart the Lord’s Name. [J/

Sacrifice am I unto those

Who Relish the Taste of the Lord’s Essence alone ;

For they, who Relish this Taste, are Pure

And they Dwell on the (Lord's) Immaculate Name. //-Pause]

Guru-Granth Sahib 90922

BAG AOECESCOSEGOSSSE COCCESEEECEEPECOEELE ESE SEOSSESEEESSOSOHESESTOSESACESEESHSCE SCORE!

Page 168 
[ 120 ]

He alone is above action! who examines the (meaning of the) Word,

And, silencing his Ego, brings into himself the Quintessence of Knowledge ;

In the (Lord’s) Precious Name, then, one finds the nine Treasures. ‘

And rising above the Three Modes, one Merges (in the Que alone), [2/

He, who is in Ego, rises not above action ;

But if he loses his I-amness, by the Guru's Grace,

And has Discritnination and ever Examines himself,

He Sings the Lord's Praise, through the Guru's Word. [3]

The Lord is the'Sea, the Ever-pure One,

His Saints, the God-wards, peck at the pearls like the swans (on its shores) ;

And, day and night, they wash off the Dirt of their Ego with its Waters.

The God-wards, in God's Love, are Pure like the swans ;

And, sublimating their Ego, they abide on the shores of the Lord’s Sea,

And, night and day, they are Imbued with the True Word,

And, so they abide eternally on the shores of the Lord’s Sea. [35/

The egocentric is like an ugly crane (revelling) in the Dirt of Ego :

He washes himself but is cleansed not. P. 129
- He, whose Ego dies in life and who Examines (the meaning) of the Guru’s Word,

His Dirt of Fgo for ever departs. [6]

One finds the Jewel (of the Lord’s Name) in one’s own Home,

By hearkening to the Word of the Perfect Guru.

And, by the Guru’s Grace, his Darkness is dispelled,

And with the Light of Wisdom in one’s heart,

One Knows oneself. [7/

He, the Lord, Creates and Sees what He Creates.

Yea, he alone is of account who Serves the True Guru :

For, into his heart alone comes the (Lord’s) Name through the Guru’s Grace, /8-3J-32]

Majb M. 3

The whole world is engrossed in the love of Maya ;

They, who work within the Three Modes, are attached to Maya.
(But) rare is the one who knows ee Truth),

And enters into the Fourth State (of Supreme Bliss). [J]

Sacrifice, am I unto those

Who, through the (Guru's) Word, burn down their love of Maya;
And, so doing, fix their mind on the Lord,

And are Honoured at the Lord’s Door. /J-Pause]

The belief in gods and goddesses is the source of Maya, the great Illusion ;
This it 1s that led to the creation of Smritis and the Shastras,

But, Lust and Anger still permeate the world,

And, coming and going, one Suffers. 2)

Within thee is the Jewel of Wisdom :

By the Guru’s Grace, it is embedded in the Mind

It is by living Truth that one gathers the merit of celibacy, self-discipline, and true speech,
And one Dwells on the (Lord's) Name, by the Guru's Grace. [3]
At her Mother's home, the would-be Bride is deluded by Illusion,
And taking to the Other, she regrets in the end.

She loses at both ends—-here and Hereafter,

And gets not Peace even in dream. [4/

If she Cherishes her Lord at her Parents’ home,

Then, by the Guru's Grace she Sees Him ever within herself.

And, Decking herself with the Word,

Is Imbued with Peace of her Lord’s Love. [3]

Blessed is the life of those who attained to the True Guru,

And burnt off their sense of Duality, through the Guru's Word ;
And Permeated whose hearts the One alone :

They, in the Society of the Holy, Sang the Praises of the Lord. [oj

1. favergut (Frege) ; he who is freed from the bonds of Karma,

Page 16
Vain is the life of one who Serves not the True Guru :
Accursed is his life, wasted away in vain;

The self-willed Cherish not the (Lord's) Name,

And so they are in great Pain. {7}

He, who Created the world, Knows alone (its state),
And He Himself Unites (it) with Himself,

And the Word is Revealed to us.

But they alone, Nanak, Receive the Name,

In whose Lot it was so Writ by God, /8-/-32-33]

Majh M. 4

He, the Primeval Lord, Yonder of the Yond, is all by Himself.

He Himself Creates; He Himself Destroys what He Creates.

He alone Works through all;

And those turned God-wards attain Glory. [J]

Sacrifice am I unto those

Who Dwell on the Name of the Formless One,

Yea, He, who has neither form, nor sign,

Yet is seen in all hearts,

The Unknowable, who is known through the Guru alone. [J-Pause] : P. 130

Thow art the Beneficent, All-merciful Lord.

Besides Thee, there is not another.

If the Guru be in Grace and Bestows the (Lord’s) Name (on us),

We Merge, through the Name, in the Name. [2 J

Thou Thyself art the Creator, our True Lord.

Immense and Vast is Thy Praise (with which we Worship Thee);

When one’s mind is satiated with Thy Name,

One enters into the Silence of the Great Peace. {3}

Night and day, O Master, I Praise Thee,

I admire Thee, O my Beloved Lord.

Without Thee, I seek no other,

And I Meet Thee, through the Guru’s Grace, [4]

Thou art Unfathomable, Beyond Knowing, Beyond Measure,

It is through Thy Grace that we Unite with Thee,

And, by the Grace of the Perfect Guru, we Dwell on the Word,

And so attain Bliss, /5/

Meritorious is the tongue that Sings of the Lord’s Merits.

(For). by Praising the (Lord's) Name, the True One is Pleasea.
¢ God-wards for ever are Imbued with His Love,

And attain Glory by Meeting the True One. [6]

The egocentric does the works in Ego,

And loses the life in a Gamble ;

Within him is the utter Darkness of Greed,

And so he comes and goes, again and over again. [7]

The Creator Himself Bestows His Glory (upon one),

In whose Lot it was so Writ by. Him.

He, Nanak, Receives the (Lord's) Name, the Dispeller of Fear,

And, through the Guru's Word, he attains Gladness, /8-J-34]

Majh M. 5

Within me is the Unknowable and (yet) I find him not:

Within me is hid the Jewel of the (Lord’s) Name.

(But), He, the Unfathomable Beyond Knowledge, Highest of the high,
Is known through the Guru's Word. /J/

Sacrifice am | unto the Saints,

Who have Recited the Name unto me in the Kali age :

Yea, they, who lean on no one, but the True One,

And whose Sight one Sees by great, good Fortune. /J-Pause]

BABAECECECOGOCOSSEOC SEOCESSEEOOPHCEEOCOL ESE OPOSELOECOSE COSLOSTOSSOOCOCCOGSE

#

:
|

Page 17
He, whom the adepts and the seekers seek,

And, on whom even Brahma and Indra Dwell in their hearts,
And the thirty-three crores of gods too,

Of Him one Sings within one's heart on Meeting the Guru, /2/
The winds Utter Thy Name, O Lord, night and day,

And the earth too Slaves at Thy Feet;

In the four sources of creation, and in all speech

Art Thou, the All-pervading Lord, Beloved of all. /3/

The True Master is known through the Guru,

And is Revealed through the Word of the Perfect Guru,

He, who Drinks (His Nectar) is satiated,

With the True One is he sated. [4]

Blessed is that house of the Great Peace,

In which is all Bliss and Happiness and Joy,

And, he alone is rich who fixes his mind on the Guru's Feet. [5]
Thou Created sustenance for all, O Lord,

Before Thou brought Thy Creation into being,

Like Thee, there is not another,

And Thee no one can equal? /6/

He, on whom is Thy Mercy, Dwells on Thee,

And practises the Mfavtram of the Saints,

He Swims across, and Saves his all,

And the Door of the Lord opens unto him. [7]

Thou art Great, the Highest of the high,

Thou art Infinite, much more than much;

Sacrifice is Nanak unto Thee,

For he, O Lord, is the Slave of Thy Slaves. {8&-J/-35/

Majh M. 5

Who is the one Emancipated; who is the one United ?

Who is the one Wise in Wisdom; who is the one Wise-in-Speech ? P. 131
Who is the houscholder, who the renouncer ?

Who, O who, of these can evaluate (the Lord)? [7]

How is the one Bound; how is the one Delivered ?

How is the one to escape coming and going ?

Who is within the bounds of Karma, who is the one beyond Karma ?

Who is the one that can say ? [2]

Who is happy, who unhappy ? :
Who is face-to-face with the Lord ? Who has turned his back (upon Him) ?
How is one to Unite, how is one Torn asunder ?

Who, O who, shall speak of the Way 7? /3/

Which is the Word that holds the mind ?

Which the Instruction that makes one relish pain and pleasure alike ?

Which is the Way that makes one Dweli on the Transcendent Lord,

And how is one to Sing of His Praise? [4/

He, whose face is turned Guru-wards, is Emancipated,

He alone knows the Way to Unite.

He is the one Wise-in-Wisdom; he is the one Wisc-in-Speech;

Blessed is he as the householder and as the renouncer both;

And he alone knows the Value (of the Lord’s Name). [5]

Through Ego is one Bound; through the Guru is one Delivered, >
Through the Guru cease one’s comings and goings, :
The one turned God-wards acts in his Karma and (yet) is above it tao,

And that what he does, he does the natural way. /6/ .

The God-wards are happy, the self-willed unhappy :

The God-ward is face-to-face with the Lord; the self-willed one turns his back (upon Him).
The God-ward is United and the self-willed Torn asunder,

Tt is through the Guru that the Way is Revealed. [7]

1. 8&5 ae) Srefent (we a FYE aTaftraT) : Lit. Him no equal can equal.
PIQIIII3339O Guru-Granth Balrib
Page 171 

PEN ed Ft dd a dd

The Guru's is the Word that holds the mind,

And through the Guru's Instruction one looks upon pain and pleasure alike.
The Guru's is the Way to Dwell upon the Lord,

And through Him are the Praises of the Lord Sung. /&/

The whole Creation is the Lord's ;

He alone Does and Establishes all, and gets his works accomplished.

From the One alone proceed the many,

And the many then Merge in the One alone. /¥-2-36/

Majh M. 5

When thy Lord, ihe Immorial, is thine, what then is thy Uneasiness about ?
When the Lord is the Eternal Master, the Slave must abide in Happiness and Peace.
Thou, © Lord, ari the Giver of Life, Peace and Glory,

And Tam happyin Thy Will. /i/

Sacrifice, O Sacrifice am T unto Thee,

Who, by the Guru's Grace, art pleasing to my body and mind.

Thou art my Shicld like a mountain, my Refuge,

And, no one can cqual Thy Glory, [/-Pause/

He, whom Thy doing tastes sweet,

He Sees Thee in all hearts.

At all places art Thou, and Thou alone Workest through all. [2/

Thou art the Fulfiller of all our desires.

Brimful is the Treasure of Thy Praise,

Thou Savest those on whom is Thy Mercy,

And by great, gocd Fortune, they Merge in Thee. [3]

Thou Takest us out of the Deep, Blind Well,

And, in Thy Mercy, Thou Lookest on Thy Slave with Thy Eye of Grace. .
And he Sings the Praise of Thee, his Eternal Lord, of which there is no limit. [4] P, 132
Thou art our Protector, both here and Hereafter,

Thou it is who nourished me in the womb of my mother.

The fire of Maya touches them not who Praise Thee, Imbued with Thy Love. [3]
Which of Thy Virtues shall I Cherish and Chime ?

I See Thee alone in my body and mind.

For, Thou alone art my Friend, my Mate, my Master,

And, without Thee, I know not ofanother. [6]

He, whom Thou Sheltered, O Lord,

Him even the hot winds touched not ;

Thou art our Master, our Refuge, the Giver of Peace,

And Thou art Revealed by Dwelling on Thee, in the Society of the Holy. [7]
Thou art Great and High, Unfathomable, Infinite, Beyond Value,

Thou art the True Master, | am Thy Slave, O Lord ;

Thou art the King: True is Thy Dominion,

And Nanak is for ever a Sacrifice unto Thee. /8-3-37]

Majh M, 5

Remember thou the Lord for ever.

And forget not Him, no never. /Pawse]

And join the Society of the Holy,

That thou goest not down the Way of Death.

Gaiher thou the fare of the Name (for thy Journey into the yond),
And (the name of) thy kind will remain unsoiled. [J /
They, who Dwell on the Master,

Are thrown nol into Hell.

Them even the hot wind touches not,

Yea, they, in whose mind is Enshrined the Lord, /2]
They are the ones Beauteous, .
Who abide in the Society of the Holy,

They, who in-gathered the Wealth of the Lord's Name,
They alone are Deep and Vast. [3]

| COO

8
:
2
¥
z
:
,

Page 17
Drink thou the Nectar, the Panacea (of the Lord's Name),

And live thou by viewing only the Lord's Own,

And fulfil thyself by Worshipping at the Guru's Feet. [4]
e, whom the Lord makes His Own,
i¢ Dwells on the one Master alone ;

Yea, he alone is Perfect, the Chosen one,

In whose Lot it is so Writ (by God), [3]

In my mind have IT Dwelt on the Lord,

And its joy is to me like his dominions to a king ;

Within me Evil takes not root,

For I am Dedicated to the (Lord’s) Truth. [6]

Thave Enshrined the Lord in my mind,

And gathered the Fruit of life.

© mind, thou hast a Lord that pleases thee,

And lo, thy Spouse is Eternal too. [7/

I have Received the everlasting (Gift of the Lord's Name)

By seeking the Refuge of the Lord, the Dispeller of Fear.

By taking to His Skirt, Nanak, I have Swum across

And won the Life Infinite for myself. /8-4-3¢/

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Enlightener.
Majh M. 5

Meditating on the Lord, our mind is held, {/-Pause]

By Dwelling on the Supreme, our fears are dispelled, [7] P, 133

He, who secks the Refuge of the Lord, grieves no more, [2]

Worshipping at the Feet of the Holy, all our Desires are Fulfilled. [3]

He, our only Lord, Pervades all hearts over the land, the seas and the inter-space. [4]

I Called on the Destroyer of Sin, Blest by the Dust of the Saints’ Feet. /35]

My Spouse has torn me away from Evil, and Iam comforted by Meditating on my Lord. [6]

The Creator did justice and all the evil-doers died, becoming mute and dumb. [7]

Nanak is Imbued with the True Name and he Sees ever the Presence of the Ever-present Lord.
[8-5-39-I-32-]-5-39]

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Hulightener.
. BARAMAHA?
Majh M. 5

Our Karma® has torn us asunder from Thee, O Lord, ©

Be Merciful and gather us into Thy Fold.

Pointlessly, we rambled, and were knocked about, now this way, now that way ;

Tortured and tired, we turn to Thy Shade.

As acow not in milk is coveted not,

As a thitsty sapling withers and flowers not,

As a forlorn woman, denied company of her spouse, has no rest,

—O, cursed be the place where Lord Resideth not—

And her body, bedecked with embellishments and her mouth, fragrant with betel-chewing, avail her

not;
So do our bosom friends become Angels of Death, if Thou, the Lord of our being, be not with us.
Beseech Thee I, therefore, O Lord, be Merciful, :
And keep me in Thy living Presence,

Where | Call on no one but Thee,

And my soul lives in Eternal Bliss. [1]

}. Lit, a Calendar Poem. Aformof Punjabi prosody in which the changing moods of the twelve months of the
year are related to the changing human moods in love, particularly when one is separated from the object of love.

9: feats aan (Faxfa wea) : frais and qgy are here syaonymous words both meaning deeds dope, but faafa is
also defined as an individual act or the cause ; and q@qy as the fruit or effect thereof identified also with habit or character.

Page 173 
With the dawn of Chaitra, let us call on Govind, the Harbinger of joy.

We are Ushered into His Realms by men of piety.

Call on Him, my tongue,

For, they who Realise Him, their Lord, make purposeful their earthly sojourn,
And denied His Grace, life wastes itself away in void.

For all is He—on lands, in waters, in spaces and stars, and woods and dales.
‘How painful it is, therefore, to lose His grip ?

Fortunate are they who Realise Him in themselves,

Oh, how my soul craves and yearns for His Vision,

In the month of Chaitra !

T tace to the Feet of him who Unites me with my Lord. [2]

How shall a Woman, Separated from her Love, get Peace in the month of Faisakh 1?

Yea, she, who forgets her Life-mate and Master and deludes herself in Maya !

Know thou, that neither sons, nor wife, nor riches shall avail thee, but the Eternal Lord,

Enmeshed in Maya, the whole world has ended in misery : :

But for the Lord’s Name, all else goes in the world to come. .

Forget not the Lord, therefore,.it is painful ; without Him all else is void.

He alone is famed as Pure who clings to the Feet of the Lord, P. 134

I pray Thee, therefore, O Lord, Enter into my Home and Depart not.
Faisakh is joyful and fragrant only if we have the touch of Him, the Eteraal Lord. [3)

)
E)
J
a
)
a
")
_
pi
éJ
7]
In Jeystha, Meet Lord the God ; to Him all pay homage, 2
Hold fast to His Skirt : He gives not thy hand to another. 3
His Name is Precious like gems and pearls : @
A Wealth that none may steal, 3
Seek thou a thousand pleasures, but knowest thou not
That He alone is the Giver of them ? 8
He Doeth what He Willeth : Thou willest what He Likes, a
Blessed are they whom God Owns as His Own. 4
By ourselves, we get not what we want, a)
Else why should we grieve for a want ?
Joy is theirs, who Meet the Holy Guru : ; .
And colourful in Jeystha becomes the Lord for those for whom it is so Ordained, [4]
i]
©)
a)

Asarh is hot for him with whom God is not,
Yea, he, who forsakes the Life of al! life and leans on mortals,
Tortured by Duality, he is gripped by the noose of the Yama, the Angel of Death.
Such are his deserts ; he reaps what he sowed.
When curtain is drawn over the night of life, regretfully man goes,
s hope, sans joy.
But they, who met the Saint, the Guru-teacher, find release at the God's Gate.
Take Mercy, O Lord, and let me urge for Thee and Thee alone.
For, there is no one other than Thee that I may pray to.
Pleasant is Asarh for him who lives and breathes m God. [3]

Blooms sure the Woman in Shravan, who Clings to the Lotus-Feet of the Lord.
Her body and mind are Imbued with Truth and her Mainstay is God's Name.
False are the colours of Maya. All that is apparent turns to ashes ;

God is the Nectar which drippeth into our souls from the Guru.

Powerful and Boundless is the Lord, Through Him are woods and glades agog.
T crave to Meet the Lord ;

Through Grace shall He be Met.

Sacrifice am I uoto those, my mates, who found the Beloved.

ake Mercy, O Lord, and Kindle my heart with Thy Name.
Pleasant is Shravan for those round whose necks Shines the Necklace of God's Name. (67

Led by Illusion, in Bhadon, they love the Other. 9
Thousands their imake-ups, but none avails, 3
The body perishes and the soul turns into a ghost. a)
Who shall succour the soul now caught in the noose of Death ? 3
In the twinkling of an eye, the loved ones have become strangers. ; g

Guru-Granth Sahib 999999%999999999999998999999999999999029990900904
Page 17
[ 126 }

Their countenance is darkened with remorse ; the body writhes and reels in anguish,

As they sowed, so shall they reap : such is the field of Karma.

Nanak, the Feet of the Lord are the boat (wherewith to Cross the Sea of the world.)

The Guru in his great love Saves.

In the month of Bhadon, there are no pains of Hell (for those who Believe and Follow). [7/

The desire to Meet the Lord is great ;

And immense is the Thirst to See His Face.

Mother, how shall I Meet Him ? Who will guide me on to Him ? P, 135
The Saints are the Support of the (Lord's) Lovers : Let me repair to their Feet.

Without Him, there is no Peace, there is no Refuge.

Those who have Tasted the Nectar of Love, they are athirst no more.

They give up all thoughts of self, and pray that they may Meet the Lord.

There is no Separation for them, who take Refuge in God.

Nanak seeks Refuge in Lord, the God ; there is no other than Him.

Great is the Peace in the month of Asuj for those who Cherish their Lord. 8]

In Kartik, do thou the Deeds and censor not another (for thy ills).

For, all ills proceed from forgetting the God.

By turning his back on Him, man suffers Separation, birth after birth.

Bitter becomes the taste of the pleasures of the senses, in the twinkling of an eye.
Nothing avails ; to whom shall we look for solace ?

That what is decreed, comes to pass’ ; What can a mortal do 7?

All his ills come to end, on Meeting the Lord, by good Fortune.

This is the prayer of Nanak : “Lord, Protect me, O Thou, the Emancipator of all.
In the month of Kartik, let my anxieties go, in the Society of the Holy men”. [9/

In the month of Maghar, in the company of the Beloved, the Soul sees Beatitude,

How shall they be Praised, who are in the Presence of their Lord 7

Health of body and the mind is theirs, who keep the Society of the Holy.

Loneliness is their Lot who do not consort with the men of God.

Pain is their Destiny, and Death their deserts.

But those who remember the God are exalted,

(And beautiful is their mien) as if hallowed by jewels and diamonds and rubies.

To have the Dust of their Feet, is the desire of Nanak ;

For, they take to the Lord’s Feet at the Gate of the Lord.

In the month of Maghar, remember the God and then there is no birth after this birth, [10]

Warm keeps the body, in the month of Poh, in the Embrace of the Beloved Gad,

The mind is transfixed in His Lotus-feet, and the glow of His Face Sustains,

He is our Help and Protection and His Service, the Profit of life.

Sing the Praises of the God in the Society of the men of God, and then Sin shall touch thee not.

This is the final goal of Love : to become one with Original Source.

The God will draw thee towards Him by taking hold of thy arm. Then there is no Separation for thee.
Infinite His nature and unknowable His Essence. Again and again, I supplicate before Him.

His Grace has come to meet me while a supplicant at His Gate.

Says Nanak, “Glorying in His Grace, there 1s every joy, every comfort, forme.” [11]

In Magha, Bathe in the Dust treaded over by the men of God.

Sing and hear the Name of God, with charity in thy heart for all.

This is how the pride goes.

This is how the dirt of Karma, accumulated birth after birth, is Washed away.

The low Lust, the Greed and the Anger, will dog thee not.

And those who follow'the Path of Truth, the world acknowledges them. P, 136
Compassion for all sentient beings : this is the essence of acts of pilgrimage and charity.

He is good and wise indeed, on whom God Bestows these Virtues.

Says Nanak, “Blessed are those who Meet the Lord."

In the month of Magha, such shall be acclaimed as Pure through the Grace of the Perfect Guru, 12]

Page 175

1. The two statements, “As they sowed, so shall they reap" (Stanza 7) aod “That what is decreed, comes to
pass", though seemingly contradictory are inherently not so. For, aé has been explained in the introduction, the Lord's
decree or Writ is not arbitrary, but related to our own Karma (or deeds), Were it not so, the question of individual effort,
to transform his thought processes, through the Word, soesto invoke God's Grace’(which again is not arbitrary, but
conditioned by moral Jaws) would become wholly irrelevant. “Thou wert separated by thy own deeds, why then cures the
other 7" says Guru Arjan in Rag Majh (Night and Day). =

20 Gurn-Granth Sahi
Great is the joy in meeting those who have befriended God.

The Holy men guide on to the Path of God, and help in Meeting the Lord.
Comfort is the Couch on which the Soul may now rest, for Pain there is not.
Great is the luck in Meeting the Lord, the Master, and all desires are satistied.
Come friends, come sisters, let us Sing the Praise of the God.

Who else can compare with Him : who other is like unto Him ?

He Gives us a place im Eternity. He Embellishes both here and Hereafter.
He Suves from the perils of the Ocean of the world.

He Frees from the cycle of births.

Nanak supplicates at Thy Feet, O God!

A mortal has only but one tongue to Sing Thy Praises Infinite.

In the month of Phaleuwn, Praise the Lord, for ever and for ever and for ever :
Yea, Him, who hath no needs, no desire, [73]

Those who remember God, their perplexities are resolved.

In the (True) Court they are judged as True, who repeat the Name of God, the True Guru.
All joys and all treasures are under His Feet,

With His aid man Crosses the tempestuous Ocean of Existence.

Love and Devotion are their protection against the fires of Evil.

The Falschood vanishes; the Doubt is no more, and the Truth prevails;

Thus they remember Lord, the God, knowing no other but One God.

Wherever there is His Grace, the month, the day, and the time are auspicious,

Bestow Thy Grace, O God !' Nanak desires but a glance at Thy Countenance. [J]4—J]

By the Grace of ‘the One Supreme Reing, the Hternal, the Hulightener.
Majh M, 5 (Night and Day)!

I Serve the True Guru, and Dwell night and day on the Lord.

I have forsaken my Self and I seek the Lord's Refuge and utter honey to Him.

I was Separated from Thee, O Lord, birth after birth,

Now Unite me with Thyself, O my Friend, my Kin !

O sister, they, who keep away from the Lord, abide not in Peace.

Without the Spouse, there is no rest; I have searched through all the spheres.

Our actions keep us away from the Lord,

Why then accuse the others ?

Be Merciful, O Lord, and Save me.

l have no other Merit (to commend me).

Without Thee we roll in. Dust.

(Without Thee), who shall we go to, with our Plaint ?

(Says) Nanak : “I pray that I See with my Eyes Thy Angelic Presence.” {J}

He, the Powerful Lord, Infinite, Listens to the (story of) our inner Pain;

Meditate, therefore, on Him in life and death,

For He is the Mainstay of all,

We all belong to Him, our Spouse with a large family?,

He Owns us in this world as also the next?

He is Highest of the high, Unknowable; His Knowledge is Unfathomable, Infinite
That Service is pleasing to Him which makes thee like Dust for the Saints to tread upon.
He is the Lord of the supportless, the Angel of Mercy and thy Saviour.

He has Saved all since Eternity : He, the True One, the All-pervading, the Creator.
No one can evaluate Him; no one can have His Measure.

He Permeates our body and Soul, He, the Infinite.

Iam a Sacrifice unto them who Serve their Lord, night and day. [2]

1. Like Sdrdmdha, “Night and Day" also is a poctic form.

2. Ag auspicious sign in an Indian home.

3. Lit. at the Parents’ home as also at the In-laws’,

4. warfa Ga (annfir ara) : whose kaowledge (iu) is unfathomable (mam),

P. 137

Guru-Branth Galib 9999999909999929999992909999999999022229999990904
Page 177

The Saints Dwell ever on the One who is Merciful to ail;

Yea, He, who Created our body and life,

And, with His Mercy, Blest us also with a Soul.

Meditate on Him through the Guru's Word, which is the (only) Pure Mantram.

We can value Him not : for He, the Lord, is Infinite.

He, in whose mind Abides the Lord, Him alone can we call Fortunate.

We are Fulfilled, when we Meet the Lord, our Spouse and Master.

Nanak lives by Meditating on Him, the Dispeller of all Sorrow,

He, who forgets not the Lord, night and day, is evergreen, [31/

The Lord has all the Merits; He is the only Support of me, the poor one;

I take to His Refuge in my mind, and live by Dwelling on the Lord's Name.

O Lord, be Merciful, that I Merge in the Dust (of Thy Saimt’s Feet).

O Lord, as Thou Kespest me, so I remain : I eat what Thou Blessest me with,

And Thou, my Lord, Makest me do the effort and, in the Society of the Holy, I Recite Thy Praise.
I see not another place : whither I may go to tell my woes ?

Thou art the only Dispeller of Ignorance and Darkness, the High, Unknowable, Beyond Measure!,
Unite, O Lord, with Thee the mind Separated from Thee.

This alone is the Prayer of Nanak,

I shall be all-joy that day when I take to the Feet of the Guru. /4-J/

Var of Majh, and the Shalokas of M. 1
[To be sung in the measure of the Ballad af Malik Murid and Chandrehra Sohia}*

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the ternal, the All-pervading, the Creator,
‘the Purusha, the Tulightener.
Shaloka M. 1

The Guru is Beneficent, the Sanctuary of Peace, the Light of the three worlds:
Eternal is his Gift (of the Word); he, who Believes in it with his whole mind, attains Peace, [J]

M. 1

At first, one is in Jove with the mother's milk,

And then he awakens to the sense of mother and father;
And then the sisters, brothers and brother's wife;

And then be awakens to the play of love,

And then is the desire ever to eat and drink,

And then arises lust that knows no caste.

And then he gathers (riches) and raises a home,

And then his body is overwhelmed with rage.

And then he turns grey and his breathing is hard:

And then he dies and is burnt to dust.

The friends who accompany the hearse, cry and wail;

(But) the Bird has flown away, knowing not whither ?

He came and he left, and even his name was dead.

After him the crows were fed and the Brahmins, out of the leafy bowls?, P. 138
Nanak : so do the self-willed creatures love Darkness all through,
And thus is the world Drowned, without the Guru, [2]

1. ong (ware) sw, 4 ©, without measure.
2. A popular ballad of ihe sixteenth century narrating the battle of Chandrehra, a courtier of Akbar, ond Murid
Khan, his general, whom Akbar had sent out on an expedition to Kabul. Murid Khan had been successful in his mission
but took some considerable time to subdue the conquered people. ‘This gave an excuse to his adversary, Chandrehra of
the Sohi tribe, to poison the mind of the emperor who thereupon ordered the former to march upen Kabul and bring
Murid Khan to book. A bitter battle ensued in which both these warriors were slain. This ballad, except for its measure,
has nothing in common with the contents of ihe ballad included in the Adi Granth.
3. Customs, which are still prevalent. They are observed in the belief thet ibe souls of dead are thereby

2222290 Guru-Granth Sahi
At ten, one is a child; at twenty a youth; al thirty a beauty;
At forty, he is full (of life}; at fifty his foot slips, at sixty, age creeps in upon him,
At seventy he loses sense; at eighty he's unfit for work,

At ninety, he lies in bed, all his vitals sapped :

I've searched and found, Nanak, the world is but a castle of smoke, [3]

Pauri

Thou, the Creator-person, art Unknowable,

But Thou (alone) Created the universe

Of various kinds. colours and qualities.

Of this Theu alone Knowest; for, all this is Thy Play.

One comes and another goes; without the Lord's Name, all is death.

The God-wards are Imbued with Thy Love, O Lord, as redness permeates the La/la-flawer.
They Dwell on Thee, the Immaculate Person, our Lord, the Maker of our Destiny.

Thou, O Lord, art the Wise-in Thyself, the Highest of the high:

I am,a Sacrifice unto those who Cherish Thee in their minds, QO True One! [J]

Shaloka M. 1

He, who put life m thy body and built thee into a beauty.

And gave thee eyes to see, the tongue to speak and the ears to fix in mind what thou hearest,

And gave thee feet to walk and hands to do and Blest thee with food and raiment,

Him thou knowest not, O Blind one, and deest dark deeds ?

When thy ‘pitcher’ is shattered into bils, none can recereate thee.

Nanak : there is no Honour (at the Lord's Court) without the Guru and without this Honour, one is

Saved not. {JJ

M.2

The self-willed wretch clings to the Gift, but not to the Giver !

Oh, how can one esteem the undersianding and knowledge of such a one ?
He (thinks he) commits his deeds in dark; but they are known all over, : i
He, who practises Virtue, is known as virtuous; he, who commits sin is known a sinner.

Thou Thyself, O Lord, Playest all Thy Game; and we cannot say this of another.

So long as Thy Light is in one, through that Light Thou Speakest,

Without Thy Light whoever has ever accomplished a thing ?

Nanak : through the Guru is He Seen, our only Lord, the Wise, the Perfect He. 2)

Pauri

Thou Thyself Created the world and Thou Thyself Engaged it in work.

And, drugging! Thy creatures with Maya, Thou Thyself hast led Thy creatures astray.

The Desire is like fire and no one in its grip is ever satiated.

Tilusion is this world, and one comes and goes (in vain).

Without the True Guru, one’s attachments break not; many have tired themselves out going the way of

works.

If one follows the Guru's Instruction and Dvwells on the Lord’s Name, and submits, with pleasure, to His
Will,

He Saves all his kins; Blessed is his mother who brought him forth. P, 139

Blessed js his understanding and magnificent his Glory, who has fixed his mind on the Lord. [2]

Shaloka M. 2

To sce without eyes, to hear without ears,
To walk without feet, to do without hands,
To speak without the tongue, Live thou thus, becoming Dead (to thyself),
And Realise thou the Lord's Will, and thus Unite with thy Lord, [JJ
1. saGel (esgel) = sane, @ poisonous potion which the deceivers (hugs) used to administer to thelr victims in

"order to make them unconscious.

Guru-Granth Salih O92
Page 17
He, the Lord, is Seen, Heard and Known, but man Knows not His Relish :

For, how can the lame, the handless and the blind one clasp the Lord in his embrace 7
With the Feet of Fear and Eyes of Love, gather-in thou Him in thy Mind,

Then, thou becomest Wise and Meetest thy Spouse. /2/

Pauri

For ever, eternally Thou, the One. Abidest; all else is Thy Play :
Thou Created Ego and ingrained Greed into Thy creatures.
Keep me, 0 Lord, as Thou Willest; for, all have to work in Thy Will.
Some Thou Blessest and they take to the Gura’s Path and Unite with Thee;
r They stand at Thy Gate as Thy Slaves, seeking nothing but Thy Name.
All else is vain for them, for, they are Dedicated to Thy True Task.
And they are Detached even in the midst of their household, for, with them Thou art Pleased.
And they are Pure from within and without, and abide ever in Thy Name. [3]

Shaloka M. 1 .

If [ abide in a cave in a mountain of gold ort down in the deeps of waters, _

Whether on the earth, or over the skies, or of I keep ever standing on my head.

Or, put on abundant clothes and wash them ever to Keep them clean*;
. And I shriek out the Vedas of the white, red, yellow and black hues?;

Or, live in dirt : all this is igaorance, for, the mind thus abides in Evil.

But if | Dwell on the (Guru's) Word, my Ego goes and no more remains the I-amness in me. [7]

M. 1

If one washes one's clothes and body, and observes all the disciplines of self-control,

He but washes only his outer dirt, but the Dirt within remains.

The Blind one has been netted by the Angel of Death.

He clings to what is not his and, in Ego, suffers Pain.

Nanak : if his Ego goes through the Guru, he Dwells on the Lord’s Name.

He Reflects and Meditates on the Name, and, through the Name, enters into (the Lord's) Peace. [2]

Pauri

The Lord has brought about the Union of the Soul‘ with the body;

The Separation is also from Him who Creates us.

The fool enjoys himself and suffers Pain,

From pleasure arises Pain and one commits Sin :

And, one is Separated from God : birth leads to death.

In Ignorance, one embroils oneself in fruitless argument.

(But), the Judgment is in the hands of the True Guru ; he alone settles one’s Doubt,
No one can sway the Lord, and that alone happens what He Wills. /4/

Shaloka M. 1

False is his speech and he usurps what is not his*, P. 140
And yet he goes out to preach to the others;

He, who himself is beguiled, will beguile his company too;

(But) such, Nanak, today are the leaders of men. [J]

1. a (a) : or.

2. To hive in caves (as the ascetics did), to stand om the head (like the Yogis), to put on abundant clothes and
cominue washing them (like the Kapris) were some of ihe common practices indulged in by the ‘seekers’ in the hope of
attaining religious merit.

3. In the Gayatri tantra, the Rig Weda is miotionsd as being of yellow hue, the Yajur Veda of red hue, the Sama
Veda of diamoad-whie colour and Atharva of collyrium black complexion, the last ome being the Veda of the present
Kali-age and the first three of the three earlier ages—Saryuea, Duapar and Treta respectively

4. 3fm (eft) 2 Literally, swan which sym dalises purity; also the soul, for, like the swan, it also flies away in the
end.

5. weerg (vara) : Lit. carriog, bur it has bosn used here, as elsewhere too in the Adi-Granth, to sigaify that
what belongs to another,

PEDRO Guru-Brestl Subhib

Page 17
He, within whom is the (Lord's) Truth, will utter also the True Name.

He walks on the Path of the Lord and makes others follow.

If one bathes in the Holy waters, one is cleansed ;

But if one bathes in a muddy puddle, one is doubly soiled.

The Holy water is the Perfect Guru ; whcever Dwells on the Lord’s Name

Ts himself Saved wiih all his kins, and Saves also the whole world through the (Lord's) Name.
Nanak, the Lord's Slave, is a Sacrifice unto him

Who himself Meditates on the Lord and makes others follow. /2/

Pauri

Some there are who live in the Weeds and feed themselves upon the roots.

Some wear the ochre robes and are acclaimed as Yogis and Sanyasins.

(But), within them burns the desire for delicacies and fine raiments.

Wasted, in vain, is their life, for, they are neither of the household, nor have they renounced the world.

Gver their heads hangs death, and they, egged on by Desire, work within the Three Modes.

But he, who becomes the Slave cf the Lerd’s Slaves, through the Guru's Instruction, him time corrodes
not,

In his True mind abides the True Word,

And he remains Detached, even when Attached.

Nanak : they, who Serve their True Guru,

They rise from desire to desirelessness. [5]

Shaloka M.'1

If blood sticks to the clothes, the clothes become impure ;

Will the minds of those be pure who suck the blood of human beings ?

Says Nanak ; “Utter thou the Name of Allah with a clean heart :

The rest is all a passing show! : \
And vain are all thy deeds”, [J] ;

M.1

When I am not, what shall I say of myself?

Nay, nothing am J, and what after all can I be?

1 do and say as the Lord Wills, and, being full (of Sins), I try to wash them off.
I know not myself but make the others know : So do ] lead men,

Nanak : if the blind cne shows the path, be will forsure mislead his company,
And when such a leader goes into the Yond, he suffers grievously, {2]

Pauri

I Dwell on Thee, O Lord, every moment, hour, month and season.

Thy count one cannot make : O Thou, the True One, Unknowable and Infinite.

The wise one is a fool if he indulges in Ego, Greed and Lust,

Read theu then the Lord’s Name and Realise the Name, and Dwell upon the Instruction of the Guru,
To carn the treasureful Wealth of Devotion. .

He, who Believes in the (Lord’s) Name, the Immaculate, is acclaimed as Trve at the Lord's Gate.

The Lord whose immense Light is within us, He, who gave us life and breath,

He alone is the True Merchant, ard the rest of the world is tut his Pedlar. [6/

Shaloka M. 1

Let Mercy be thy mosque*, Faith thy prayer-mat : ard Honest living thy Quran.

Humility thy circumcision ; and Good conduct thy fast.

Thus dest theu beccme a (true) Muslim.

If pious works be thy Kaaba, and Truth thy teacher and gocd deeds thy Prayer,

Ard if thy rosary be of His Will, the Lord, will Keep thy Honour. /J/ P. 141

1. fee (feare) (Persian Garg, the embellished introduction), hence embellishments, false shows.
2% Obviously, this and tbe following two stanzas are. addressed to the Muslims. 3

GurGranth Sahib 990999999999999999992
Page 18

M.1

To deprive one of his due is to eat the (forbidden) cow for one, and swine for the other,
The Guru-teacher stands by us. if we usurp not another's due,

By mere talk none goes to the Heavens : for, Emancipation is by living the Truth.

If one seasons one’s sinful food with condiments, it becomes not pure thereby.

Nanak : thPough False talk one gathers nothing but Falsehood. [2/

M. 1

Thou sayest thy Prayers five times, giving them five names,

Let Truth be thy first, Honest living the second : and the good of all, thy third ;

Let thy fourth Prayer be the Honest mind and the fifth the Praise of the Lord.
f Say thou, pray, the Praver of Deeds, and be thow thus a (true) Muslim :

Any other Prayer is false and, false is their value. [3/

Pauri

Some trade in jewels, others in glass :

If the True Guru is Pleased, we find the Treasure of Jewels within us,

Without the Guru, no one has found it, the False and Blind ones have shouted in vain.

The self-willed are wasted away by Duality, for, they Dwell not on the Real.

Without the One, there is not another ; r

Who else is there to listen to our Woes ?

Some remain poor and yelp in vain ; the others have treasurefuls of wealth,

(But), without the (Lord's) Name, there is no other wealth ; all else is poison and dust.

Nanak : He, the One, Doth and Makes others do ; and, through His Will, Blesses us He with Beatitude.
[7]

Shaloka HM. 1

Hard it is to call oneself a Muslim? : If one has these (attributes) then alone is he one :

First, let the Faith in Allah* seem sweet to him,

And then with this as scraper, let him scrub his inside clean of Egot.

And, with faith in the leader of his faith, let him break the Illusion of life and death.

And submit to the Will of Allah, and, Believing in his Eternal Creator, he should lose his self,
And, Nanak, if he is merciful to all creatures, truly he is acclaimed as a (true) Muslim. [J]

M. 4

Shed thy Lust, Anger, Falsehood, Slander, Ego, and love of Maya ;
Shed thy lust for the woman ; and attain, within the dark world, to God, the Immaculate.
Shed thy pride and thy attachment to thy sons and wife, and thirst for Desire, and be Attuned to thy

ord,
Nisak : the Tm One Cometh into thy mind, and, through the True Word, thou Mergest in the Lord's
ame,

Pauri

Neither the kings, nor the subjects, nor the chiefs will remain,

Neither the cities, nor the streets, nor the shops, by His Will.

The fool thinks the solid and beautiful mansions will remain his,

(But know ye that) treasures, full of wealth, are emptied in a moment,

The horses, chariots, camels, elephants and their coats of iron® ;

Gardens, lands, houses, tents, Niwar-beds, screens of satin", O, which of these is thine ?
Nanak : the Beneficent Lord alone is True, and He is Revealed through His Nature.? [8]

1. For Hindus and Muslims respectively,
2. This stanza is obviously addressed to the Muslims.
3. ote wig (arefat Z1q) : “the faith of the prophet (mtGfs, oat Z)," suggests Jodh Singh.
_ 4. ART eT gg MATS (Fee AAT arg gard) : Lit, who with the scraper ((umeas, f. ¢. Hafaat) scrapes away the
deposits (175) of ego (Hat Le. utm).
3. ung (art) : coat of mail.
6. Rated (ergy) ; literally a tent-wall : srt (erreit) is satin.
7. Also, Power,

OED TO OED OD DIDI II III §$Guru-Branth Sahih

Page 18
Shaloka M, 1

If the rivulets were the cows-in-milk, and the springs would yield milk and butter,

And all the earth were sugar with which the mind were immensely pleased, P, 142
If the mountains were of gold and silver, studded with jewels and rubies,

Even then I would Worship Thee, O Lord, and my desire to Utter Thy Praise will go not. [JI]

M. 1

If all the world’s vegetation’, and fruits were for me, and tenderly sweet were their taste? ;

And (possessed of miraculous powers), I could stay the sun and the moon from their eternal wanderings.
Even then I would Worship Thee, O Lord, and my desire to Utter Thy Praise will go not. £2)

M. 1

If my body writhed in pain, under the impact of the evil stars*, z a
And the blood-sucking kings had sway over my head ; if such bemy condition. :
Even then I shall Worship Thee, O Lord, and my desire to Utter Thy Praise will gonot. [3/

M, 1

If the sun and the moon were my garments, and winds my food,
And mated I with the houris of the heavens, Nanak, all these will pass away.
I shall still Worship my Lord, and my desire to Utter His Praise will go not. [4]

Pauri-

The Evil doer, the Demon', knows not the Master,

Call him a mad-cap who knows not himself,

Strife in the world is an evil ; contention consumes the world.

Without the (Lord’s) Name all else is false, and the Doubt destroys us all.
He, to whom the two ways® are revealed as one, is Blessed ;

(But) he, who believes not (in it), burns in his own inner fire.

Blessed is the whole world (if it) abides in the (Lord's) Truth ;

Yea, he, who loses his self, will be approved at the Lord's Court, [9]

Shaloka M. 1

He alone lives in whom Lives the Lord.

None else is alive, O Nanak! °

Tf one loses Honour in life,

Impure is all that one eats.
He, who, imbued with the love of dominions and riches, dances to their tune unashamedly,
Is beguiled, O Nanak, cheated is he of Life.

For, without the (Lord's) Name, one loses one’s Honour. [J]

M. 1

What use is the food or the raiment,

If the mind Cherishes not the True Name of the Lord ?

What use the fruits, butter, sugar, sweets, meats and refined wheat-flour ?
What use the clothes, the cosy couch, and the indulgence ?

What.use the hosts, the royal assistants, and dwelling in palaces ?

Nanak ‘without the True Name, all these show-pieces will pass away. [2]

Pauri

Whit merit is in caste?) Know thou the Truth within ;
(OF whatever ¢2 caste one may be), he, who tastes the poison will die !

1. ava 4 mtd ‘(are aaa) : Lit. eighteen loads (of vegetables and fruits). It is believed that if one gathers a leaf

each of every kind of vegetation, it will cam: to cighteen loads (or ninety maunds).
2. agar Ole ew (err gry Jars): whoss taste (my, pre) is ggg! (tender), qastis a Sindhi word,’

meaning tender.
3, wu mad ae ay (ara 4tg Ry tia): Rahu and Kew, two Stars (efe ad) of evil import (uy ary).

4, dearer (fatat) : (Arabic at matt) foolish,
5. The two ways (of the Hindus and the Muslims).

GurnGrath Sabik 990920222999992999920090999999999992029999999904

Page 18
[ 134 ]

Know ye, the True One alone Rules over us all,

And they alone are the elect of the Lord who submit to His Will.

For this task were we sent by the Lord {into the world) ; :
The Guru-drummer has, through the Word, proclaimed this to all men.

Hearing it, some have jumped (upon their Horses) ; others ure putting on’ (the Saddle), ’

Still others are gathering their Load, and some have even ridden off? (to their Destined End). /J0/

Shaloka M. 1

When the crop is ripe, it is sheared : only the straw remains within the fence. ;

And then the stalk? 15 put to the thresher along with the thorns, and the grain is shaken off its body
And then between the two-mill-stones, the grain is ground,

(Bul) Jo, the wonder that they, whe stick to the mill-pate, are Saved! [JJ

M,. 1

See thou how they cut up the sugar-cane and bind its feet ; Page 143
And then, men strong of limb, crush it, in a crusher ;

And then its juice is heated in an iron pan*, and it wails,

And its froth too is burnt in fire.

See thou now the woclul state of this leafy sweet! [2

Pauri

Some know not death, and limitless is their desire ;

They are of no avail ; they are born to die again and over again.

In their own minds, they think themselves to be good,

But, the self-willed are eyed by the Angel of Death.

The egolists are untrue to their sali and value not what the Lord has Blest them with.

Even if they make their bowings (to the Lord) by force (of custom), Him they please nat.

If one attains to the (Lord's) Truth and in his mouth is the (Lord's) Name, the Lord will Bless him ;
And even the kings will bow before him ; and he will Fulfilhis Destiny. ////

Shaloka M, 1

What is the deep (seu) to a fish, what the sky to the bird® ?

What is cold to a stone, Whal is a home to an eunuch ?

Apply chandan to a dog : its nature remains as a dog's.

Read thou the Smritis before the deaf one, but will he (hear to) know ?

Light thou a hundred lamps before the blind, but will they see ?

» Spread thou gold before the cow, it will eal only the grass.

Put thou condiments in iron, but it will not become tender Jike cotton therewith,
Nanak : the fool has this trait in him that what he speaks is all vain. {Jj

M. 1 :

If a piece of bronze or gold or iron breaks into bits, the smith welds them againt in fire.
If the husband breaks off from the wife, the sons unite the two again.

If the monarch makes a demand, he is satisfied if the demund be met.
The hungry stomach is sated only if it is filled with food,

The famine goes if it rains well and the streams are full.

And the lovers are united by sweet words,

And the Vedas are Jearnt through true speech,

And the dead are united (with the living) through Truth and Beneficence.
Such are the things that unite and mend,

But the fool is mended only on being struck in the face. .
Nanak reveals this truth after a great thought,

That through the Lord's Praise are we United with the Lord's Court. {2/

Aya} (area) : (Persian, Arey) to make, to construct.
aryg} (arenft) : (From Persian gna, to run),

aleve (Siar) : (Sans. fewrs:;), the beard of corn.

4, zefa (zzfz) : iton-pan.

§, That is, the depth of the sea is of Ile consequence to the fish.; so also the vasiness of the sky to the birds.
They know not their significance,

a en

Page 18
He Himself Created the Universe and Himself gives it thought.

Some are False, while the others are True (Coins) : (but), He Himself is the Tester.
The True (Coins) are accepted in His Treasury, while the False ones are cast aside.
In the True Court, the False ones are cast aside ; to whom shall they go to wail ?

They.should follow the True Guru : for, this alone is the Pure Deed
The True Guru tums the Impure into Pure ; and, through the Word, ont is made Beautcous.

In the True Court are they acknowledged for their love of the Guru :
No count (of their virtues) can one make whom the Lord Himseif has Blest. [12]

Shaloka M, 1

The whole! world, the Pirs, the Shefkhs and the chiefs will all be buried under the earth.
The monarchs will also pass away : (for), God alone is Eternal’,

Thou, O Lord, art the only One ; yea, the One alone. [J]

M. 1

Neither angels, nor demons, nor men,

Nor Siddhas, nor seekers on the earth (will remain).

The Lord alone is*, no other save Him is there, O none :

He alone is ; yea, He the One. [2/ P. 144

M. 1

No other there is to do justice to men (over land or the skies)
Nor in the seven underworlds ;

He alone is : no other save Him is there, O none: -

He alone is ; yea, He the One. [3]

M. 1

e}
f)
E)
6)
cs
fH)
F)
€,
2]
i]
&)
&)
Neither the sun, nor the moon, nor the spheres, S
Nor the seven Islands, nor the (seven) seas,
Neither food, nor air, is eternal, O none :
He alone is, yea, He the One. [4]
3
8
4)

M. 1

None other (than Him) has thy sustenance in his hands,
(For) all lean on His Support.

He alone is, no other save Him is there, O none :

Oh, He alone is, yea, He the One. [5]

M.1
A bird has nothing to call his own,
(But), the water and the trees (all-over) are his :

God, the only Giver gives ;
(For), He alone is ; yea, He alone is. [6]

M.1

Nanak : that what was Writ in thy Lot ¥y God, no one can erase ;
He alone Gives power to thee ;

He alone Takes it away ;

(For), He alone is ; yea, He alone is. [7]

Poori
True is Thy Command ; through the Guru is it Known ;
He, who loses himself, knows the Truth.

1. oy (ge): (Persian aa), all.

2. oy (amy) : (Persian), literally progress, power.

3. ofa (waft) : (Persian), is.

’

Page 18
{ 136 |

True is Thy Court, O Lord, proclaimed through the Word.

By Dwelling on the True Word, one Merges in Thy Truth.

The self-willed creatures are False ; they are deluded by Doubt, ‘
They live in Dirt and know not the Taste (of the Truc One).

They come and go unmindful of the (Lord's) Name -

Nanak : the Lord alone is the Tester : (for), who else can tell who's True, who's False, [13]

‘ Shaloka M. 1

(If the Lord Wills), He may make the tigers and hawks and kites and falcons to eat grass.
And the grass-eating animals he may feed on the meats.

He may dry up the beds of the streams and flood the deserts.

A mere worm he may exalt to kingship and reduce to dust the armies (arrayed against him).
All creatures live by breathing ; but He may keep one without breath’, if He Wills.

Nanak: as the True One Willeth, so doth man abide. [J]

M.1

Some are fed on meats, some on grass,

Some are provided with delicacies of all kinds?.

Some abide in the earth and eat the dust ;

Some live only to breathe and count their breath? ;

And others there are who live by the Name of the Formless Lord.

May their Giver live, that no one Dies :

For, they, who keep the Lord in their minds, are beguiled not (by Death), {2/

Pauri

By good Fortune, do we Dedicate ourselves to the Service of Perfect Guru,

And lose ourselves, through the Guru's Word, and Dwell on the (Lord's) Name.

He, who takes to another task, wastes away his life in vain ;

Without the (Lord's) Name all that we wear and eat is poison.

(But) he, who Praises the True Word, Merges in Truth,

Without Service of the Guru, there is no Peace and one comes and goes.

With the False capital-stock, we carn Falschood in the world .

Praise thou, Nanak, the True One, that thou goest into the Yond with Honour. /i4/

Shaloka M, 1

When it is Thy Will, one Sings and dances or cleans oneself ;

When it is Thy Will, one smears (one's body) with ashes and blows the (Yogi's) horn. ; P, 146
When it is Thy Will, one reads the Muslim texts and is acclaimed as a Mullah or a Sheikh,

When it is Thy Will, one is a king and indulges in the pleasures of life.

When it is Thy Will, one is a warrior and puts the enemy’s head to the sword.

When it is Thy Will, one wanders in yonder lands, and, gathering Wisdom, returns home ;

And when it is Thy Will, man is Imbued with Thy Name and, being in Thy Will, is pleasing to Thee.
Prays Nanak : this alone is worth (one’s life) ; all else is the practice of false values. {J

M. 1

As Thou art Great, Greatness flows from Thee.

Being Good, Thou Doest nothing but good.

As Thou art True, Truth Pervades all ; and nothing is false.

The seeing, uttering, wandering about, life and death—all will pass away.
Thou Createst and Keepest all in Thy Will, O Thou, the True One! /2/

Pauri

Serve thou the True Guru, without Doubt. and thy Delusion gots
Do thou the Deeds that the Guru wishes thee to do

If the True Guru be in Mercy, we Dwell on the (Lord's) Name ;
And find the Quintessence of Worship through the Guru.

1. at fe Ara (aris erate) : Him (atfa) without (1) breath (Fa).

2. pete off (ete qa) : Indian delicacies are considered to be of thirty six kinds,
3. Like the Yogis.

Page 18
BR eS ee TTT eT eer er eT TTT eT eT
eee eee

The egocentrics are enveloped by the Darkness of Falsehood, and Falsehood practise they ;

When we reach the True Gate, we speak nothing but Truth,
And the True One then Calls us into His Abode of Truth,
Nanak : the True One is for ever True ; and through Truth do we Merge in the Lord. [15]

Shaloka M. 1

The Kali-age is (like) the knife ; the kings are (like) butchers.
And righteousness has taken wings ;

All around, it is the dark night of Falsehood ;

And Truth? ©, where is the moon of Truth ?

The vain search has made me mad,

And I see not my Path in the dark.

And I suffer the pain of Ego, and Wail.
Say thou, O Nanak. how will thou be Saved ? [J]

M. 3

In the Kali-age, the only visible Light in the world is the Lord’s Praise,

Though rare is the one who Swims across (the Sea of Existence) through the Guru.
He, on whom is His Pleasure, him He Blesses with (His Grace) ;

And he, Nanak, Receives the Jewel (of the Lord’s Name) through the Guru, [2)

Pauri
The godly and the worldly (beings) stay for ever apart : :
The Creator Himself is never in error, and no one can lead Him astray.
The godly He Unites with Himself, and they practise nothing but Truth.
(But), the worldly creatures are lost, for, uttering Falschood, they eat but Poison,
They know notQieath, and cultivate Lust and Anger in themselves ; .
The godly. Serve their Lord and Dwell upon Him night and day. °
They lose their Ego from within, being the Slaves of the Lord’s Slaves. -

Glorious are their countenances at the Lord's Gate, and, through the True Word, they look Beauteowt
[I

Shaloka M. 1

They, who Praise ‘the Lord in the early morn, with asingle mind,

They alone are the True Kings ; for at the right time they. have grappled (with themselves).
In the second watch (of the day), mind wanders and jis scattered in.may ways.

And one is lost in the deeps of life's strife, and is Drowned.
In the third watch, one puts food in one’s mouth, when bark one's thirst and hunger, P. 146

All that one eats becomes dust, yet are we attached to the eats. ;
Inthe fourth watch, one feels drowsy, closes one’s eyes and enters into the world of dream!.

And then again he rises to enter the arena of strife, in the battle of a hundred years.
But if one fears the Lord, day and night, then all times are sacred (for Worship).
Nanak : only if the True One comes into one’s. mind,

One is truly cleansed, [1]

M. 2 :

They alone are the True Kings who have Attained to the Perfect (Lord).
Day and night, they are in ecstasy, Imbued with the Love of the One alone.
Rare is the one who bathes in the Infinite Beauty of the Lord.

By good Fortune, one meets with the Perfect Guru whose speech is Truth.
Nanak : if He, the Lord, Fulfils one, one weighs not less, in any wise. [2]

Paori .

When Thou art there, what need have I of another ?

But, when one is beguiled by Strife, one attains not to Thy Castle.

Being hard-bearted, one loses the merit of Service.

The heart which Cherishes not Truth must break and be built again.

How is one, O Lord, to weigh aright in Thy Eye ?

If one stills one's Ego, (then) no one speaks ill of him. . ; ,

1. ype afer (gare ment) : Lit. goeth to (the land of } Yama (iia), .

Page 18
Page 187

{ 138 }

At the Wise (Lord's) Gate, the True ones ring True and are Approved.
(But), the (True) Merchandise is at the only house—and that is of the Perfect Guru's. /J77]

Shaloka M 2

For the eight watches (of the night and-day), we are engaged with the eight portions’ (of the body) but
search not the nioth® within us.

For, within us are the nine Treasures (of the Lord's Name), and deeps of Good.

They, who have the True Destiny, Praise Him, the Lord, by repairing to the Guru,

In the fourth watch of early morn, in the conscious minds *wells up joy,

And they then befriend the rivers and i in their mouths and minds is the (Lord's) ‘True Name.

Then Nectar rains (upon them) and, by the Lord's Grace, they are Blest.

And their Gold is tested (on the Touchstone) ; they take on the colour of their Beauteous Lord,

If the Lord, the Jeweller, Beholds them with Grace, not again will they be melted in Fire,

In the (other) seven watches, one should love the Truth, and keep the Society of the Wise.

And Discriminate between Good and Evil that one is rid of Untruth.

There, the False ones are cast aside, and the true ones are lauded,

Wain is all our prattle, Nanak, for pleasure and pain are in the Hands of the Lord. [J]

M. 2

Air the Guru, Water the Father,

Great Earth the Mother,

Nurses—Night and Day,

In whose lap the world doth play.

Our deeds, good and bad,

Are read

In the Presence of the Lord of Law,

QOus Actions keep us far, or near Him draw.

They, who Dwell on the Name, their toil is over.

Glorious are their beings, Nanak, they Save many more‘. [2]

Pauri

The True food is the Lord’s Love —so has the Guru taught.

If one be pleased with the Lord, and flowers through the (Lord's) Truth,

True then is one’s abode, if one lives in oneself.

Through the Guru's Grace, one Receives the (Lord's) Name, and flowers in the Lord's Love.

Into the Court of the True One, enter not the False.

Where there is nothing but Untruth, that house is lost.

The True Word is the Pass-word®, and Blest with it no one can obstruct thy Way.

Hear thou then the Truth, Know it and Utter it, and thou art ushered into the Presence of the
Lord, [18} P. 147

Shaloka M. 1

If I clothed myself with fire, and abided in the house of snow and chewed iron for my feed,

And I gulped down all pain like water, and drove the world before me,

And weighed I the earth and the skies in the scales with a mere copper® :

And if so great I be that [ contained not myself within me, and all were driven by my will,

And so powerful be my mind that I did what | willed, while others (only) followed

(Vain would this be all :) for, as Great is the Lord, so is His Mercy which He Bestows in His Will.
Nanak ; he, on whom is His Grace, he attains the Glory of the True Name. [J]

DS OOHOSOGOGOCSCOOSSSSSOSSOC

ns os (ag ae): eight parts, /e, five sense-desires and three modes (Gunas).
ie. the self.
Hola (Hefrar) : plural of Fafg (conscious mind),
But for ee addition of one word--‘jg—in the last line, this entire stanza occurs also i in Guru Ninak's Japu
i 12.) -
4. ane (Arerfit) has been employed to mzan the standard, sign (of approval), password, blest with which
one’s path is never obstructed. The metaphor is borrowed from the procedure of the royal court in medieval times,
6. gq (2H) : a weight equal to four mashaz (about four grams). Io some books, its weight is given as ten mashas, /

BRN D>

22290 Gurnu-Granth Subib
The tongue is not sated by speech, nor the ears by what they hear.

The eyes are sated not by what they see—all these are seekers of the same kind? :

And their Hunger goes not by tall talk.

Nanak : the Hungry one is satiated only if he Utters the Lord's Praise and Merges in Him who is
worthy of our Praise.

Pauri

Without the (Love of the) True One, all else is Vain and False.

Without the (Love of the) True One, the False ones are bourd down and driven off (by the Yama).
Without the (Love of the) True One, the body is as dust, and to dust it returns.

Without the (Love of the) True One, all that we eat and wear increases our craving for them.
Being False to the True One, we attain not to His Court ;

Being attached to False attachments, we lose the Lord's Castle,

The whole world js cheated thus and comes and goes (in vain).

In the body is the fire of Desire.and it is quenched only through the (Guru’s) Word. [/9]

Shaloka M. 1

Nanak : the Guru is the Tree of Contentment, which flowers in Faith and fruitions in Wisdom.
Watered by the Lord's Love, it remains ever-green, and it ripens through Deeds and Meditation.
Glorious is the tongue that Tastes it: this is the Lord’s Gift of gifts. [1]

M. 1

(The True Guru is) the tree of gold, its leaves are of corals, its flowers of diamonds and pearls,
Its fruit is of rubies that comes from his mouth, for he Sees (the Lord) within himself,

Nanak : if it be so Writ in one’s Lot on the Forehead,

One earns the merit of girdling all the pilgrim-stations from the Worship of the Guru's Feet,
Violence?, Attachment, Greed and Anger are the four rivulets of Fire :

He, who is in their grip, burns himself and is Saved only through (the Lord's) Grace. [2]

Pauri

Still thy Ego in thy life that thou regrettest not (in the end).

Vain is this world, but how shall I make thee know 7

We love not the (Lord's) Truth, and engage ourselves in Strife,

Over the heads of us all stands the Angel of Death.

This wild Demon slays us treacherously, as is the Lord's Will.

If it be in His Will, we Enshrine the Lord's Love in our minds,

We can larry not a moment when the cup (of life) is full ;

Know thou then the Truth, through the Guru*g Grace, and Merge in the (Lord's) Truth. (20)

Shaloka M. 1

The bitter colocynth, swallow-wort, thorn-apple, and neem?
Are in the mind and the mouth of one who cherishes Thee not, O Lord.
Nanak : how shall we then instruct them, when the men of Evil Destiny‘ destroy themselves thus. [J]

M. 1

Thy mind is like the bird, and as are its deeds, it becomes now good, now evil ; P, 148
It sits now on the (sweet-smelling) Chandan, now on the bough of the (poisonous) swallow-wort,

And then again is Attuned to the highest Truth.

Nanak ; the Lord Drives all in His Will ; for such, indeed, is His Nature. /2]

Pauri

Many, O many, discourse on the Lord—and pass away.
They discourse on the Vedas too ; but Infinite is the Lord,

I. fe. sense desires.

2. on (ga )= fon": violence.

3, The taste of these is very bitter and if taken in excess they act 23 poison.
4. gan wad (wor aq?) : without (rq) destiny (amr),

wo

BOGGS SECSGGCGSG0088

é

|

Page 18
[ 140 }

Not by reading, but by Knowing, is the Mystery Revealed unto us.

Six are the ways of the Shastras, but rare is the one who Merges in the (Lord's) Truth (through them).
The True Person is Unknowable and His Beauty is Revealed through the (Guru’s) Word.

He, who Helieves in the Name of the Infinite, is Approved at the Lord’s Court,

T salute my Creator, for I am a bard (at His Door).

He, the One, is Eternal through the ages ; Enshrine thou then Him in thy mind, /21/

Shaloka M. 2

If one can only but charm a scorpion and handle a serpent,

One burns oneself with one’s own torch.

Such being the Will of the Lord, one is kicked down the hill,

If a self-willed focl fights with the godly, he is condemned by God, the Just,

For, He the Lord Himself is the Judge at both ends and Discriminates! He Himself.
Nanak : know thow this, that all is in His Will. /J/

M. 2

Nanak : a True Judge is he who examines himself ;

And, he alone is the Physician who knows both the Disease and the Cure.

On the Way, the Traveller embroils* himself not, and thinks himself to be a Guest (in the world) ;
He talks after he knows the Great Essence and befriends only his likes.

He is like the intercessor who is lured not by greed and goes only by Truth,

If a man aims his arrow’ at the sky, how will it reach there ?

Know thou, O bowman, the sky is far, far away®. [2]

Pauri

The attachment of the Bride to her Spouse is seasoned" by Love ;
She Worships her Lord night and day, and is held not back.

The Word makes her Beauteous and she Abides in the Castle of the Lord.
How true is the prayer of the meek !

How Beauteous she looks with her Lord, she who walks in His Will !

To her bosom friends, she says this in prayer :

“Accursed is the life without the (Lord's) Name ;

For I am Decked* by the Word, and have tasted the Nectar thereof." [22]

Shaloka M. 1

The deserts are satiated not by rain ; nor is fire satiated (by wood),
The king is satisfied not by his dominions, and the seas are thirsty as soon as they are full.
Says Nanak, “Such is my thirst for the True Name : I seck its company ever and for ever more.” [1]

M.2

So long as one Knows not the Lord, one’s life is vain ;

The world is like the sea ; by the Guru's Grace does one Swim across,

“He, the Lord, is All-powerful,” so has Nanak Realised.

The Cause is in the Hands of Creator who keeps all power to Himself. /2]

Pauri

In the Court of the Lord abides the bard.
Praising the True Master, the Lotus (of his mind) has flowered, _
(Through the Master's Mercy), he Attains to the Perfect Lord and is Joyed in his Mind,
He drives out his Foes (from within himself) and so his Friend is Pleased.
1. feQuife (frasre) : Lit. fe (another) +-hpfe (effort).
2. yest (ATTaT) : (Arabic), embroilment ; task, ete, .
3. feng (fang) : (Sans. fafirez, meritorious) ; courier, pleader, the intercessor, elsewhere used as qritg,
4, mg (we) : (arrow); Aq (if one aims).
5. wa Ga wed 3, ederne (wt wig orig &, wreeg ary) : Ga here denotes the sky, exjeq (From yryer) is one
who strikes with the arrow, ie., the bowman.
6. Lit. decked, embellished.
7. feral weg (aartt ara) : Lit, We (nina) were decked (merd)),

Page 18
He, who Serves the True Guru, finds the Way ; P. 149
And, Dwelling on the True Name, overcomes (his fear of ) death.

The bard then utters the Unutterable, made Beauteous by the Word.

Nanak : by holding on to the Treasure of Virtue,

He Meets with the Lord, his Love. [23]

Shaloka M. 1

Born of Error’, one commits Error and is committed to Error more and more.
Wash thou him a hundred times, his Dirt goes not.

Nanak : we are forgiven only if the Lord Forgives,

Else hell is our life. [I]

M. 1

Vain is our desire, Nanak, to ask for pleasure and to shun pain.
For, pain and pleasure are the clothes one gets to wear at the Lord's Gate.
Where of no avail is our wailing, wise it is to keep one’s silence there. [2]

Se ag ag ae Ty as a ha ag aT

Pauri

Searching Him in the four directions, I came (to the fifth) within me,

(And therein) I Saw the True Person, Infinite, the Creator, who See-cth all,

Strayed from the Path, I was brought back to it.

Praise be to the True Guru (through whom) I gathered-in the Truth.

And found the Jewel within my Home—how dazzling is its Light ?

They, who Praise the Lord through the True Word, are happy, abiding in the (Lord’s) Truth.
(But) they, who Fear not the Lord, are ever in fear and their Ego destroys them all.

The world roams wildly about, like a demon, without the (Lord’s) Name. [24]

Shaloka M. 3

Blessed is his life
Who lives and dies in the Fear (of the Lord) and keeps it also in his mind, J)

M. 3

He, who lives not in (the Lord’s) Fear and revels in pleasures ;
And dies without imbibing the Fear (of the Lord), has a Black countenance, and thus, Q Nanak, he

leaves the world. /{2/

Pauri

If the Lord be Merciful, we are Fulfilled.

If the Lord be Merciful, we grieve not ever.

If the Lord be Merciful, we know not Pain.

If the Lord be Merciful, we Enjoy the Love of the Lord.

If the Lord be Merciful, what terror has death for us ? -
If the Lord be Merciful, we are ever and for ever in Peace.

If the Lord be Merciful, we Receive the nine Treasures (of the Name).

If the Lord be Merciful, we Merge in the (Lord's) Truth, 25]

Shaloka M. 1

They, who pluck their heads and drink the washi( of otheis)|and beg for the leavings of bread to eat®,
And rake up the filth, and suck bad odours*, and dread (clean) water’, (how unwise are they) ?

Like sheep, their heads are plucked and their hands are soiled with ashes ; :

__They give up the Way of of their forefathers, and their kindreds waii.

~

BABEESCCECSSSSEHSSSESSEESESOSOPOSCOSESEC EC ESEEESE BOE ECOCOC!

1, wat (afar) : (Persian) error, sin.
2. This hymn refers to the practices of a sect of the Jainas.
3, Ja'et (42781) : is bad odour emitted by th: earth when the atmosphere is close, It does not mean raw water,

at Trumpp suggests.
4, All these practices are mzant to avoid life-killing even unintentionally,

g
:
E
w
&
8
I,
8
:
:
|

Page 19
[ 142 ]

None offers rice-balls on a leafy plate (at their death), nor is the earthen lamp lighted! (for them) ;

Nor are their funeral rites performed, O, where will they be cast ?

No Brabmin eats their bread, nor do the holy places offer them Refuge.

They are anointed not on the forehead, and they ever remain unclean.

Crouched in silence, they sit as if in mourning, and go not to the (True) Court.

A begging bowl slung from their side and a brcom in their hands, they walk one behind the other.

Neither are they Yogis, nor Jangams*, nor Qazis, nor Mullahs: P, 150

They wander about, Jost to the Lord. Wasted thus, is their whole herd.

He, the Lord, alone Sustains and Destroys : none else, can save life,

He, who goes without a wash and practises net (true) compassion,— © ashes be on his shaven head !

Out of the water came the jewels when the seas were churned with the stick of the mountain of gold? :

On the Eanks of the waters are the sixty-eight places cf pilgrimage,

Where men gather at festivals and talk (of the Lord).

After a wash one says one’s prayers : the wise cleanse themselves always with a bath.

At birth, as at death are men washed to give them peace.

But these bald-headed devils are pleased not with this.

When it rains, there's joy all-round : in water lies the key to all life.

It is the rains, thal prow food, sugar, and cotton which gives a covering to ail.

When it rains the cow has grass lo graze, and the hcuscwife the curds to churn :

And also the ghee with which is the sacred fire prepitiated, and the Yajva and worship performed and
all our works are blest.

The Guru is the Sea and his Words‘ the streams, bathing in which one attains Glory.

Nanak : they the bald-heads that bathe not, O, dust be on their heads! J]

M. 2

What is cold before the fire ? What is night before the sun ?

What is darkness before the moon ? What is caste before the water and the winds ?

What are feods to the earth which produces all foods ?

Nanak : what is that honour which one Receives not from the Lord, the Bestower of all Glory ? [2]

Pauri

O Thou True, Thou wonderful (Lérd),Praise be to Thee.

Thou alone hast the Eternal Court, all others come and go,

He, who seeks the Gift of Truth, is the one like Thee,

For, Truth is Thy Command and one becomes Beauteous through the True Word.
Believing in Thee, one is endowed by Thee with Wisdom and Intuition.

By Thy Grace, do we obtain the standard of Thy Name, which is eternal.

Thou art the True Giver, and Givest more and more each day.

Nanak seeks from Thee the Gift ihat Pleascth Thee, O Lord! /26]

Shaloka M. 2

What shall I say to those whose Guru is Nanak, the Angel (of God).
(For), they, who have become Wise in his Instruction, are Imbwed with the Praise of the Lord. [J]

M. 1

He, to whom He Himself Reveals (the Truth), alone knows.

He, whom He Himself awakens (to His Reality) knows all.

He, who merely prattles, involves himself in Maya.

By the Lord's Will are all forms brought into being.

He alone knows all thoughts :

Nanak : this is the Voice of Eternity :

That he, on whom is the Lord's Mercy, casts away his Doubt, [2]

1. Asis dome in the cor. > other Hindus.

2. gen (arm) ; the followers of Shiva.

3. The reference is to the Purami¢ Jore (See p. $).

4. fail (feet) : cannot be rendered as “Ye ‘Sikhs’ or ‘disciples’ as Teja Singh and Trumpp have done. ‘[74l’ in
diminutive of “frfmit’® (instruction). ;

20 Guru-Granth Sabib
Page 191
Me, the worthless bard, the Lord has Blest with (His) Service,

Be it night or day, many a time He Gives His Call,

And Calls me He verily into His Presence.

And there I Praise Him and Receive the Robe (of Honour).

And the Nectar-Name becomes my everlasting food,

He, who is satiated with the Guru’s Word, enters the Realm of Peace.

The bard then Dwells on the Lord's Praise, and Sings out the Word.

Nanak : by Praising the True One, the Perfect Lord is Revealed to him, [27]

~

CECECOGSSOSSSSOCOSESSSCOSSHESCOSECEL ES BESBESEGHSESEOGOSGS:

Ls

GuruGratth Salih 999029900999999999999099999999999999052999999990

Page 19
Rag Gauri Guareri M. 1, Chaupadas and Dupadas

By the Grace of the @ne Supreme Being, The Hternal, the All-pervading Purusha,
The Creator, Without Fear, Without Hate, the Being Meyond Time,
Not-incuruated, Self-existent, The Hulightener.

The Lord's Fear is overpowering? and is hard to bear® ; P, 151
But, the mind's instruction is far lighter and of lighter weight 1s its prattle.

But he, who suffers the Weight (of the Lord's Fear) over his head,

On Him js the Lord's Grace and he Dwells on the (Instruction of )the Guru, 7
Without (the Lord’s) Fear, not one has Crossed (the Sea of Existence),

(For), with this Fear is Decked the (Lord's) Love. [J-Pause]

The fire of Fear that is within us burns brighter the more we Fear our Lord,

We feed this Fire with (the Love of ) the Word.

Without the Lord's Fear, all that one Casts is false,

False is the Mould, and false the beating (on the Anvil). /2/

The play of intellect leads us to (sensual) pleasures :

Were we a thousand times cleverer, the fire of Fear will mould us not (to true purpose).
Nanak : the self-willed speak (in vain) like the wind,

And, False is their word, for, it is nothing but sound. f3-l]

Gauri M. 1

The Fear of the Lord Reveals to us our Self and it drives out all other fears? ;
Vain is that fear which makes us afraid all the more,

Without Thee, O Lord, I have no other Refuge ;

(For), all that happens is in Thy Will. /7) .

Why be afraid when there is no other Fear (but the Lord's),

And, all other fears are the hallucinations of the mind? [/-Pause/

Of oneself, one neither dies nor lives, is neither drowned nor Swims across.
For, He, who Created (the Universe) Does it all alone.

One comes and goes as is the Will (of the Lord),

And all over, behind, and in the Yond, Pervades the Lord’s Will. [2]
Violence’, Attachment, Desire, vault over us like the sky ;

And within us is Hunger that flows ever like the flooded stream® ;

But he, who feeds himself on the Lord's Fear (is Saved) ;

Without it, one’s life is wasted away, in Ignorance, [3]

Some there are s rted by som

But Thou, O Lord, belongest | to all ‘and all belong to Thee.

He, to whom belong all life, all Treasures,

To describe Him, (the Indescribable) is hard indeed. [4-2]

Gauri M, 1

Let Mind be thy mother, Contentment thy father,
And Truth, thy only® brother. J}

1. Wa (34) : means the same as the English word ‘much’.

2. Lit, of heavy weight.

3. afa ug wha ey fa sa whe (whe ve aft ce eft ee arg): Lit. through the Lord's Pear (gfg) one enters one's
home wg and through this Fear in one's home other fears depart.

4. 0 (#4): fam, violence,

5. meng (waar) : liz coedered by Teja Singh as ego; not to consider any one equal (ms) to oneself
(Shabdarath, p. 151).

6 8 4g (4 ang): like (mrs) a stream (2),

7. fan a afe del afe afe (fae wr ate “V8 ae stg): Lit, If one hath some one to lean upon, thea he has only
someone to lean upon.

8. fasiy (faitq) : Lit, means ‘special’.

Page 19
Say not thou, for thou canst say not, P, 152
And, His Powers one carnot evaluate. //-Pause/

Let Self-surrender and Intuition be thy parents-in law ;

And make Deeds thy wife, O mind! /2]

Let thy Union (with the Holy) be thy Date ; and Detachment (from the world) thy Marriage ;

And Truth be thy offspring. WNanak : know thou that this alone is the True Yoga. [3-3]

Gauri M. 1

The air, the water and the fire unite to create thy body,

Which plays (to the tune of) thy ever restless incellect.

(If thou closest thy) nine doors, lo, the Tenth Gate (opens unto thee),
Know thou this, O wise one, for this is the Essence of Wisdom. (lj
He the Lord alone Utters, O He alone Hears.

And, he who examines himself, alone is Wise, [J-Pause]

The ‘body i is but the dust ; the breath’ is but the wind ;

Who then, O wise one, ever dies ?

The death, verily, is of the Strife, of Ego, in the mind,

Dies not the Seer within thee—the undying Self, [2/

The Ideal that one goes to find at the holy places,

That Jewel, O man, is within thy heart.

In vain do the Pundits read and argue,

For they know not that the Thing is within them. [3]

No, it is not Me who dies, but the Demon within me,

For, how can he die who lives in Him (the Deathless He).

Nanak ; the Guru has Revealed to me (the Mystery) of the Lord,
And now I know neither birth*, nor death. [4-4]

Gaori M, 1 Dakhbni

Sacrifice am J a hundred times unto him, who Hears, Knows, and Believes in the (Lord’s) Name,
When Thou, the Lord, strayest me away from the Path, I have no other Refuge to seek,

And when Thou makest me, Wise-in-Thee, I am United with Thee. [J]

I seck the Name of the Lord which goes along with me ;

For, without the (Lord's) Name, all are in the grip of Death. {J—Pause]

The True Farming and Trade lie in seeking the Refuge of the (Lord’s) Name ;

(For man) holds together the seeds of virtue and sin,

And his self is struck by Lust and Anger.

They, who forget the (Lord's) Name have evil in their minds, {2/

The True Guru gives this True Instruction,

That if one is Wise-in-Truth, one’s body and mind will rest in cool comfort...

Like the Nilofar, and like the lotus within (and yet above) water (one should remain detached)’.
And be Imbued with the Word, then one is sweet like the sugarcane*, [3/

In the fortress (of the body) are the ten Doors by His Will,

And the five (elements) abide together, and within them: is the Light Infinite.

Nanak : He, the Lord, Hitself is the Merchandise* ; He Himself the Merchant :

And, it is through His Name that we look Beauteous. [4-5]

Gauri M. 1

The man is born and then he dies ; where from does he come ? ©
Where does he come from and whither goes he ?

Why is he bound down, how is. he released ?

How does he Merge in the Great Peace of the Eternal Lord? [J]
He who has the Nectar-Name in the heart and the mouth,

And Dwells on it, becomes Detached like the Lord. /J-Pause/

1. Literally, speech.

2. javgt (qa) ; may also be rendered as ‘going’.

3. Fe urfefs gn ave udte (er quefr wa eee Tire): Lit, His test (ugly, uy) is that he lives" like the
Nilofar (ygfea) in water (78) like the lotus (a¥e) in water (an),

4. gly (fa) : (Sans. ger), sugarcane.

3. nefu 38 (enft g4) : Lit. He is Himself being weighed.

Guru-Granth Sahib 9909999999999999999999209999999999933329
Page 19
[ 146 ]

He comes and goes in Peace, as is the Natural Law.
He is born of (the desires of ) the mind ;
And merges into the mind again,
The God-wards are Emancipated and go nol the Round (again). .

For), they dwell on the Word and through the (Lord's) Name get Deliverance. [2]

m the tree (of life) abide many birds at night ;

Of these some are happy, some not ; and lured by the desires of the mind, they all perish.
Night and day, they look (longingly) towards the skies.

And wander about in all directions, as is the Writ of Karma. [3]

(But), they who are Merged jn the (Lord's) Name take the world to bz a pasture-halt’, P. 133
And, shedding their Lust and Anger, break the pitcher of the poisonous Maya,

Without the capital-stock (of the Lord's Name), our homes and our stores are empty.
But when the Guru meets with us, He opens unto us the ‘Hard Door*, [4]

The Saints one meets with if one is so Destined,

They are the Lord's Own, (for, they) are pleased with the Lord's Truth.

They who Surrender to the Lord their mind and body the natural way,

Take thou, Nanak, to their Feet. [5-6]

Gauri M, 1

My mind is lured by Lust, Anger and Maya,
And is awake only to the evils of Falsehood and Attachment ;
And gathers-in the capital-stock of Evil and Greed.
Swim 5a (she pa of Existence), O my mind, (with the support of) the Lord’s Immaculate
ame, [J
Hail to Thee, O True One, I seek Thy Refuge.
I am a sinner of sinners ; Thou art the Purest of the Pure. {J-Pause j
The fire and water (in us) unite to make life speak in all its fury,
The tongue and other sensual organs have each a taste to seek,
And our vision views nothing but Evil, and the mind is without the Lord’s Fear and Love.
How can then one Realise the Lord's Name‘if one slays not one’s Ego? [2]
He who Dies in the Word, dies not again :
Without (this) Death, how is one to attain Perfection 7?
The mind is deluded by Maya and Duality ;
And), he alone is at Peace on whom is the Lord's Grace. [3]
ward thou the (Guru's) Boat when comes thy turn :
(For), he who gets not the Passage is Approved not at the Lord’s Court,
Blessed be the Guru's sanctuary where I Praise the (Lord's) Truth,
And where, Nanak, one Sees the Lord, the Absolute, everywhere. [4-7

Gauri M. 1

Reflecting on the Lord, the (inverted) Lotus (of my mind) has turned upwards,
And from the sky, the Tenth Door, pours the rain of Nectar.
And the Lord seems now to me to Pervade* all the three worlds. [J]
my mind, cast off thy Doubt, .

‘or, when the mind Accepts the (Lord’s) Truth,
One Drinks the Nectar (of the Lord’s Name). [J-Pause]
Conquer thy mind, O man, and accept in mind the (truth of) death ;
And if thy Ego dies, to thy mind will be Revealed the Essence.
When one's intuition awakens, one sees one’s Home within himself. [2]
The true austerity and abstinence, and ablution lie in practising the Lord's Name.
Why then one must spread oneself out and afar.
Know thou that the Innr-knower of all hearts is thy Lord, 3]
If I believed in another, | would go to another ;
Now, who shall I ask when there is no one to ask (but God)?
Says Nanak, “Only through the Guru’s Word, [ Merge in the Great Peace.” [4-8]

1. dfefs are (refit arg) : the pasture-ground, i¢., a transitory phise, for the cows graze here for a time and
then are back to their sheds,

2. 4e, the tenth door.
3. Lit, pierces through.

2222832232900 Gurn-Branth Sahib
Page 19
When the True Guru is met with, he Reveals unto us (the merit of ) Death.
And then we Die (to ourselves) and so do we love to live,

And, overpowering our Ego, we reach the Realm of the Sky. [JJ

Death is writ in our Lot, and we abide not for ever.

Dwell thou then on the Lord and Seck His Refuge. //-Pause}

When the True Guru meets thee, thy Duality departs ;

Thy Lotus flowers and thy mind takes to thy Lord, the Master.

He (whose Ego) dies in life, he partakes of the Great Essence’, /2/
Meeting with the True Guru, one is disciplined by Truth and thus made Pure,
And one scales the Heights, higher and higher still.

And then enters His Grace, when our fear of Death departs fi]
Meeting with the Guru, one enters into the Embrace of the Lord,

And, by the Guru's Grace, one Sees the Lord’s Castle within oneself.

And stilling one’s Ego, Nanak, one is Merged in the Lord. [4-9/

Gauri M. 1
No one ‘can erase’the Writ of Karma ; P, 154
I know not what iny fate will be in the yond.
For all that happens is in His Will,
And there is not another who can do a thing. [J]
1 know not what is the Writ of Karma, nor how great is Thy Munificence, Oo Lord !
To me all the Merit of the way of works and religion, is in the Easmnce of Thy Name. /J-Pawse]
Thou art so Great, so Beneficent,
That Thy Treasure of Worship is ever brimful.
No one can get away with his Ego,
For one’s life and body are Thine, O Lord! [2/
Thou Takest and Givest life, and Forgiving, Unitest us with Thee,
And, as is Thy Will, so one Meditates on Thy Name.
Thow art Wise and True, my Over-lord, the Seer ;
Through the Guru's Word, 1 trust in no one but Thee. [3)'
He, whose mind is Imbued with the Lord's Love, is Pure also in body,
And, through the Guru’s Word, one Knows the Truth Revealed through it.
Thine, O Lord, is the power (within me) ; my only Glory is the Glory of Thy Name.
Nanak, therefore, seeks the Refuge of Thy Devotees, O Lord! [4-J0/

Gauri M. 1

He, my Lord, who made me utter the Unutterable and drink Nectar,
Made all other fears depart (save His) and I Merged in His Name. /[J/
Why shall I fear then when all fears are dispelled by the Fear of the Lord,
nd, through the Perfect Guru, the Word is Revealed to me. /{J—Pause]
He, whose heart treasures the Lord's Name,
Is Blessed, as is the natural law, [2]
They, whor He puts to deep slumber, day and night,
They, the self-willed ones are bound to Death, here and Hereafter. [3]
They, in whose heart is the Lord, night and day, are the Perfect ones,
And, Nanak, Meeting with the Lord, their doubts are cast off. /4-/J/ ‘

Gauri M. 1

He, who loves the three attributes (of Maya), comes and goes.

The four Vedas describe but only the form (of the Lord),

And the three attributes (of Nature).

But the fourth State of Bliss? is known only through the Guru, who Reveals the Lord (unto us). [Ij

The Worship of the Lord and the Service of the Guru— -
Therewith one Swims across (the Sea of Existence):
And, then, one is born not again nor dies. {J-Pause]

Ll. 40 aR oa (mgr ty art) : Lit. before him (vrai) is the Great Essence (1araR).

2. wot (qwr): (Sans. qq), severed.
' 3. galerenat (qtterraar) ; (For Turiya, see p. 33).

Page 19
COCSECECECECOEESCEED

SOCLECECEHEOS

CHEECH EES

AS,

'<,

[ 148 ]

The Smritis and the Shastras and the Pundits say this :

That there are only four lite-objects’ to seck,

But they know not the meaning thereof.

For, the Deliverance comes only through the Worship of the Lord. [2]
He, in whose heart Dwells the Lord,

He, through the Guru, Receives the Gift of Devotion.

The Devotion to the Lord leads one to Deliverance and Gladness,
And, through the Guru's Word, one attains Eternal Bliss. [3

He, who Attained to the Lord and Realised Him through the Guru,
He, in the midst of hope, Realised the (beatitude of ) Detachment.
He, the Lord of the meek, the Giver of All-peace,

With the Love of His Feet is Nanak’s mind Imbued. /4-/2]

Gawi Cheti M. I

So Jong as life's play endures, the beauteous body remains in comfort, :
And practises much untruth, and is greedy and is thus oppressed by the weight (of Sin).

© body, I have seen thee being wasted away like the dust on the earth. [J
Listen now to my advice ;

The good one does alone remains,

And, one may get not another such chance (of human life). [J-Pause]}

Listen to my advice, O my body, I say this to you: P, 155
‘You slander other people, and indulge in tale-bearing,

And behold another's woman, and thus commit the theft (of beauty).

But when your soul departs, you remain behind like a deserted woman, [2]

© body, you abide as if in a dream and do not a (good) deed.

Whenever | stole (a march over others), my mind liked it most;

Vain thus became my life and | got no rest either here or Hereafter, [3]

Now, immense is my Pain, and no one cares for me. [ /-Pause}

The Arabian and Turkish horses, gold and loads of raiments,

Nothing of these, O fool, keeps one’s company (into the Yond).

I have tasted all swecis, but nothing is sweeter than the Nectar-Name of the Lord. [4]

I raised the walls (of my body) over a strong foundation, but, lo, the temple became as dust (in the end).
One gathers and parts not with one’s riches, for the blind one thinks these are his.

But when the dominions and the mansions of gold? remained not (with Ravana, the King of Lanka),
How can the riches go along with another? /5/

O my ignorant mind, listen to me.

All that happens is in His Will, / J-Pause}

Our Masier is the great Merchant, we are his pedlars :

Our body and life are His, for He alone Gives and Destroys life, fo—J-J3]

Gauri Cheti M. 1

Alone | have to fight with five* rivals : how shall | keep my home (safe), O mind !
Each day, they oppress and beguile me: to whom shall I go te vent my grief ? [i]
Utter one must the Name of the Lord.

For, in the Yond, one faces the cruel gang of the Yama. | J-Pause]

The Lord Created the Temple of the body with (nine) doors and within it sits the Seeker-soul.
And the body enjoys leisurely the (false) play, while the Five hostiles* rob (his within). [2]
(Death) demolished this temple and robbed it (of life) and the lone soul was in its deathly grip,
Her neck chained. the Yana whipped her with his rod, and the Five now took to their heels. [3]
The wife seeks gold avd silver and the friends but need only to eat,

And lo, for them, Nanak, one commits sin, and so is one bound down and dragged away into the abode
of Death, f4-2-/4/]
Gauri Cheti M. 1

(O Yogi), pierce thy heart, (not ears), for thy rings,
And let thy body be the (Yogi's) robes,

Discipline thy Five Disciples and let the Mind be thy staff (to lean upon). [JJ

O VOSTISASSHGHSSSCOSCCOCHCHS

1. Avtreite (righteousness), Arta (worldly wealth), Kama (sex), and Moksha (deliverance).

2. Ravana, the enticve of Rama's wife, Sita, is believed to have ruled over Ceylon (Lanta) and his palace is stated
to have beén carved out of gold.

3. Lust, wrath, greed, attachment and ego.

Page 197
Thus jt is that one finds the key to (the truce) Yoga,

“The Word alone is eternal ; the rest passes away”,

Let this be thy mind's food of roots. //-Pause] '

Thou shavest thy head (at the Ganga’s banks) to enter into the fold of thy Guru ;
But I've made the Guru my Ganga.

Why not, O Blind one, remember thy Master, the Saviour of the three worlds ? [2]
Why all this (Pious) show ? Why engage thyself in (false) prattle, :
Which removes not thy mind's doubt ?

Why run about in greed to here and there:

Why not fix thy mind on the Feet of the One Lord alone? /3/

Saturate thy mind with Him and Dwell on Him, thy Immaculate Lord.

Why then, O Yogi, thou makest thy false claims? {J—Pause]

Wild is thy body and childish is thy soul,

For thou passest thy life in I-amness.

Prayeth Nanak, “When thy naked body will be burnt,

Only then wilt thou regret (thy deeds)" /4-3-J5]

3

Gauri Cheti M. 1

O my mind, there is only one panacea, one Manrram, one herb (for all thy ailments) :

Fix thy mind firmly on the Lord.

Take thou to Him who Washes away all the Sins of our Karma accumulated birth after birth, [J]

O my mind, love only the One Master,

For the three attributes (of Maya) attach thee to the world,

But this‘wise’one knows not the Unknowable. /J—Pause]

Maya tastes sweet to our body, and we carry the load of Ego (on our head),

The Night is ary and we see not that the rope (of life) is being eaten away by the mouse (of
Time), [2

If one follows one’s own will, one suffers Pain ; if God's Will, one attains Glory.

For, that alone happens, which is in His Will, and no one can erase the eternal Writ of Karma, [3]

They, who are brimful with the Lord’s Love, lose not a particle of it.

If Nanak be the Dust of their Feet, then he, the Ignorant one, would also be fulfilled. [4-4-6]

Gauri Cheti M, 1

Whence was my mother, my father, from where did we come (into the world) 7

Of the fire (of the other's womb) and the water of (the father’s) sperm, for what purpose were we
born? fd

© my Master, who is it that knows Thy Merits ?

And as for my Sins—O, who can make a count? / J—Pause]

T assumed the form of myriads of trees and coursed also through the animal life,

And assumed too the stare of crawling worms, and of the winged birds. [2]

I broke into shops and cities and strong houses, and, committing theft, (stealthily) came home.

But though [ saved myself from the eye of man, yet how could | keep my secret from Thee? [3]

One may visit all the world, the holy places, the banks of rivers, cities and stores,

In the end the (life's) pedlar has to weigh up (the Truth of Existence) within his own heart. [4]

As the sea is brimtul with water, so are my Sins without count. |

Take Pity, O Lord, and in Thy Grace, let this Stone also Swim across. [3]

My life is ever on fire and within my heart is the knife ;

But, prays Nanak, if | accept Thy Will,

I attain to Thy Eternal Peace. /6~$-17)

Gauri Bairagan M. 1

Sleeping, I waste the night : eating, I waste the day :

And lo, the Jewel of life is being sold away for a trite. [J]
He, who knows not the Name of the Lord,

Regets he, the Ignorant one, in the end, [/—Pause]

Gurv-Granth Sahib OI2o2X
Page 19

é’)
#
o)
)
&)
&)
f)
all
e)
J
a
Z
?)
es
()
J
e
fj)
5
€)
a
&
2
a
3
4
3
3
i]
a
&)
2)
3
“)
3
=|
4
904

ke
ty
(5
&
c

[ 150 }

One buries one's perishable wealth in the ground, bul how can one love the perishable’ ?

For, he, who does so, loses it in the end.

If one were to gather everything through one’s own efforts, then every one of us would be tore 157 .
‘ape

But the Lord Gives as are one’s deserts, even though we all crave (for everything under the sun). 73]

Nanak : He, who Created the Creation, He alore ts its Support ;

But, one knows not His Will as to who shall be Blest with His Glory. /4-/-/8/

Gauri Bairagan M. 1

I would love to be a deer, abiding in the woods and living on the roots,

If, by the Guru's Grace, thus do I Meet my Lord unto whom I ama Sacrifice. [J/
J am the pedlar of my Lord,

And Deal only in the Merchandise of His Name. [/-Pause]

1 would be a Koe/, sheltered in a mengo grove, and Dwell, in peace, on the Word.
If thus do ] Meet my Lord of indescribable Beauty, the natural way. /2/

T would be a fish, abiding im water, if thus do T remember the Lord who Supports all ;
And Hug Him, in a close Embrace, and see him here, there and everywhere. [3/

I would be a serpent living under the ground,

If thus would the (music of the) Word charm me to make me fear-free.

Nanak : he alone for ever is Blest whose Soul Merges in the All-Soul. /4-2-/9]

Gauri Poorbi Deepaki M. 1
the Grace of the @ne Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Lulightener.
ud t pe Bs BH

In whatever state of mind is God Dwelt upon, and (His Name) Recited,
Attain thou to that state, Meditate upon Him, and Sing His Praises. [7]
Sing the Praises of my Lord, the Fear-free.

I ama Sacrifice unto the Song that brings the mind home. [/-Pause]
He, who Protects us all, each day, and Watches over us all,

He, whose gifts cannot be evaluated ; how shall we, then, evaluate the Giver? /2/
The Day of my rendezvous is fixed:

Pour oil on the threshold, my mates, ;

And bless me that I attain to the Union of my Lord, /3/

In homes all over the Courier calls Each day.

Forget not then the Onc who Calls,

For the Day must come for us all. /4-J-20)

Rag Gauri M. 3, Chaupadas
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Hulightener.

Gauri Guareri

He who is Met with by the Guru, Meets also his Lord,

But, the Lord it is who Unites us with the Guru.

My Lord of Himself Knows all the Ways,

And Unites us with Himself, through His Will,

And Reveals His Word unto us. [J/

Through the Fear of the Lord, all our Doubts and Fears depart,

He, who is Imbued with His Fear, Merges in the Love of Truth. [1—Pause/
Meeting with the Guru, the Lord Abides in our minds, imperceptibly.

My Lord is Almighty ; I can value Him not: P. 158
I Praise Him through the Word Infinite.

And He, my Master, in His Mercy, Forgives all. [2]

I. nase Ty Teel wa, ems at whoo ate (waar wg erode at, aa a nfger arg) : One places (wd) one's perish-
3 ables (naa'=nfaa) in the earth (ga, wan), (but) how can one love (afar whe) the perishable (maa) 7

Page 19
Meeting with the Guru, one’s mind is Illumined,

And the mind becomes Pure, and He, the True One, is Enshrined in it.

If one abides i in Truth, True become all one's deeds,

And one's deeds are Pure and one dwells on the Word, [3]

Through the Guru, one engages in the Service of Truth.

But rare is the one to whom, through the Guru, is the Lord's Name Revealed.
O Thou, the Eternal, Beneficent Lord,

Bless me with the Love of Thy Name,’ 4-J-2/)

Gauri Guareri M, 3

Rare is the one who seeks Wisdom from the Guru :
Blessed is he to whom the Guru Reveals (the Mystery of the Lord),
From the Guru is the great Peace of Poise and Dwelling on the Truth ;
From the Guru doth the Door of Salvation (open unto us). [J]
By great, good Fortune is the Guru met,
And one Merges in the Peace of Truth. [ [-Pause}
Meeting with the Guru, the Fire of Desire is quenched.
From the Guru doth Peace come into our minds,
From the Guru do the fallen ones become Whole and Pure.
Through the Guru is one Attuned tothe Word, [2]
Without the Guru, all wander about in Doubt,
And without the Lord’s Name, they suffer grievous Pain,
The God-wards Dwell on nothing but the Lord's Name,
And, Seeing the True One, attain True Glory. /3/]
Shall we ask another when the Lord is the only One alone.
He, in His Grace, enables us to Receive the Word
And we Meet our Beloved Lord and Sing His Praises,
_ And.so do we Merge in the True One. [4-2-22]

Gauri Guareri M. 3

That place alone is True where the mind becomes Pure ;

And, becoming True, abides in Truth.

The True Word is known through the four Ages;

The True One is of Himself Truc. /7/

By good Fortune, one meets with the Saints, :

And in association with them one Sings the Praises of the Lord, [J-Pause]
Burn thou the tongue that takes to another,

And Tastes not the Essence of the Lord and speaks sour,

Without Knowing (the Lord), the body and mind are vain,

And, without the Lord’s Name, the world wails in Pain. 2]

The tongue that Tastes the Lord's Essence, the natural way,

Merges in Truth, through the Guru's Grace ;

And is Imbued with the True One and Dwells on the Guru's Word,

And so Drinks at the Fount of Pure Nectar. /3/

The Lord’s Name is gathered in the pot (of the Mind),

But when the bow! is down-cast, how can it contain the Lord’s Name ?
Through the Guru’s Word doth the mind abide in the Name.

Nanak ; True is the (mind’s) bowl, which craves to Receive the (Guru's) Word. /4-3-23]

Gauri Guareri M, 3

Some sing (the Lord's Praise), but relish not the Taste,

For they sing in Ego, and so is their utterance wasted.

He alone Sings truly who loves the (Lord’ s) Name, -

And Dwells on the True Word, /I} ; .

If the True Guru So Wills, our singing is approved, : . ~ -
And our mind and body are Imbued with the (Lord's) Name and look Btauteous, _ [J-Pause] ;

Some there are who sing, others dance, een P, 159°

But attain not to the Lord’s Name without Love in their hearts, ,

The True Worship is in the Love of the Guru's Word,

And in keeping one’s Lord in one's heart, [2]

}. gaa (unfit) —gardi® : they who dance or perform, Tre

Page 200 7 a | -

SEOESSSGSSHASSGSSOCOOAE PESASECOSCECEOCOSOCES

LMBBESECLGOS CHOOS

{ 152 }

He, who dances to worship and thus to make himself known,

He dances in vain and suffers grievous Pain.

By dancing about, one worships not the Lord : .
But he, who dies in the Word, attains to the (Lord's) Truth. /3/

He, the Lord, is the Lover of His Devotees, and Makes He all Worship Him.

True Worship is that by which one loses one’s self.

My True Master Knows all my ways,

And so He Blesses Nanak, and the Lord’s Name is Revealed unto him, [4-4- 24]

Gauri Guareri M. 3

He, whose mind's (ego) dies, his outgoings cease :

(For) how can one Attain to the Lord, without dying thus ?

The mind is held, if one Knows the Way,

Yea, it is through the Word that the mindis held. [JJ

He, whom the Lord Blesses with Glory,

Into his heart Comes the Lord, through the Guru's Grace, [/-Pawse}
If he practises the deeds (of Piety) by the Guru’s Grace,

He knows the Mystery of his Mind,

The mind is like the wine-intoxicated elephant :

The-Guru is the goad that disciplines it and keeps it awake (to the Path), /2/
The mind is wild and rare is the one who controls it,

If it eats the Uneatable?, then the mind becomes Pure.

The God-wards make their minds Beautcous thus :

They shed their Ego and the sense of Sin. [3]

He, who is Destined to Unite with the Lord,

He Separates not from Him and into Him he Merges.

The God alone Knows his Mysterious Powers.

Nanhak : through the Guru is His Name Revealed. [4-5-25]

Gauri Guareri M. 3

Ego has made the whole world mad ;

And, through Duality, one is lost in Doubt.

His anxiety is limitless, for he Knows not his Self ;

And, in strife, he loses his life. {J

Dwell thou on the Lord in thy heart, O dear,

And, by the Guru's Grace, let thy tongue Taste the Truth. {l-Pause]

The God-wards, unto whose heart is Revealed the Lord,

They Serve the Life of all life and are known through the four Ages.

Shedding their Ego, they know the Guru's Word,

And on them is the Mercy of the Lord, the Master of our Destiny. /2/
Those alone are True who are United with the Lord, through the Guru's Word :
Their minds are held and their wanderings cease.

The nine Treasures of the (Lord’s) Name one Receives from the Guru,

And, by His Grace, is the Lord Enshrined in our minds. {3]

By uttering the Name of the Lord, our body is at Peace.

And, the Lord Abides in us and then there is no punishment of the Yama for us
The Lord Himself is the King : He Himself is His Own Counsel.

Nanak : Serve thou, therefore, Him, the Treasure of all Virtues. {4-6-26]

Gauri Guareri M. 3

Why forget Him who has given thee life and soul ?
Why forget Him who Pervades all ?
And, by Serving whom one is Honoured at the Lord's Court? {J}

1. 46 HHe Hee feeens (Fy Hag Ane fase) : The mind (Hg) is like (fHaers, Arabic, equal to) the elephant
(Fa, Sans. 4eafeq, an clephant in rut), intoxicated (4g—Hfsor) with wine (4).

2. That is, fills the mind with the Lord which is a task as hard of achievement as to eut the uneatable, for it tastes
biter io the jnitial stages, ihe more so because one has to deny oneself and still one's sense-desires.

Tar — -—— — el ieee el -

Gurn-Greth Sahib

Page 20
Sacrifice am 1 unto the Name of the Lord.

(For), forsaking Him, I cease 10 be, [ 1-Patse/

Forget Thee they, O Lord, whom Thou Thyself leadest astray, P. 16
Forget Thee they who are led by Duality;

And the self-willed, being Unwise, are cast again into the womb. [2]

They, on whom is God’s Perfect Grace, Dedicate themselves to the Service of the Guru;
They, on Whom is His Perfect Grace, Enshrine the Lord in their heart.

And, through the Guru's Word, Merge in the Name of the Lord. [3]

They, who have Virtue in their Treasure, Dwell on the Lord's Wisdom.

They, who have Virtue in their Treasure, shed their Ego.

Nanak is a Sacrifice unto those who are Imbued with the Lord's Name. [4-7-27/

Gauri Guareri M. 3

Thou art Ineflable; how can one describe Thee, O Lord !

Through the Guru's Word art Thou Enshrined in the mind.

Thy Virtues are limitless; who of us can set a price on them? /J/

The Lord's Word is Merged in Him, the Lord to whom it belongs.

Thy Gospel is unutterable; it is uttered only through the Guru's Word. /J—Pause J
Wherever is the True Guru, there congregate also the Holy

Therein is Sung the Lord’s Praise, in utter Peace,

Wherever js the True Guru, there, through the Word, doth the Ego (of man) depart. /2]
By Service (of the Lord), through the Guru's Grace, one gets a Place in the Lord’s Mansion
And, through the Guru, is the Lord's Name Enshrined in one's heart,

Through the Guru's Word, one Worships the Lord and Merges in the Lord's Name. [3]
The Beneficent Lord of Himself Bestows His Munificence,

And one Joves the Perfect Guru.

Hail, all Hail, Nanak, to those, who are Imbued with the Lord's Name. {4-88-28

Gauri Guareri M. 3

From the One alone are all forms, all colours;

In all bodies are kept together* the same air, water and fire;

And He, the Lord, Sees all in different forms. fi}

He, the Lord, is wonderful, yea, He the One;

But rare are the God-wards who Reflect on this. /J-—Patse]

The Lord Pervades all, at all places :

He is the Manifest as also the Unmanifest.

He, of Himself, Awakens one out of Slumber. [2/

No one can put value on Him,

Though all have said and may say it again.

He, who Merges in the Guru’s Word knows the Lord. /3/

He, the Lord, Hears and Sees and Attunes one to the (Guru's) Word,
And one attains Glory by thus serving the Guru.

Nanak : they, who are Imbued with the (Lord's) Name, are Merged in their Lord, {4-9-29]

Gauri Guareri M, 3

The Egocentrics are Asleep, enveloped by the love of Maya.

The God-ward: are Awakened by Dwelling on the Wisdom of Virtue.

They alone are Awake whose Love is the Lord’s Name. [J]

He, who is awake to the Peace of Poise, Sleeps not,

But rare is the one who Knows the Truth from the Perfect Guru. [1-Pause]

The Unsaintly, Ignorant being Knows not (the Truth).

He speaks (in vain) and is engrossed in Maya.

Being Blind and Unwise, he is Fulfilled not. (2)

In this Kali-age, the Lord’s Name alone Saves, a
(But), rare is the one who Dwells on the Guru's Word, (which Reveals the Lord’s Name) _
And, thus, Saves himself and also his kindreds. [3]

BABS LOCCE COGBSSSSSSE POPCAGESESECECPOBCRE ESBS EGOSCSCECESOSOHSASIEGOE

1, Rosier! (agen) : they who are t together.

i

Page 202 
[ 154 ]

No one in this Kali-age is attracted by Dharma or (good) Actions : P. 161
This Age (as if) was born in the House of Evil.
(But), know thou, Nanak, that no one is Saved, save through the Lord's Name. /4-J0-30]

Gaori Guareri M, 3

True is the Lord, True is His Command.
They, whose minds are Imbued with the True and the Care-free Lord,

Listen thou, O my mind, Dwell on the Word;

And Meditate on the Lord to Swim across the Sea of Existence. {J-Pause/

In Doubt does the man come; in Doubt he departs,

This world is born out of Duality.

The Egocentric Cherishes not (the Lord) and comes and goes again and overagain. [2]
Is the man led astray by the Lord or he himself goes astray,

And his life is yoked to the service of the Other,

And he earns great Sorrow and loses his life? /3/]

If He, the Lord. be in Mercy. He leads one to the Guru, .

And one Cherishes only the one Name of God and casts away his Doubt :

And one Dwells only on the (Lord's) Name and Receives the nine Treasures (of Good). [4-J]-31)

Gauri Guareri M. 3

Ask them, the God-wards, who Meditate (on the Lord’s Name),
Who, through the Guru's Service, are satiated in mind,
They alone are rich who earn the Lord's Name.
And gather-in Wisdom through the Perfect Guru. [J]
' Dwell thou on the Lord's Name, O brother,
And the.Lord will approve of thy Service. /J-Pause]
He, who Realises himself, becomes Pure.
He is Emancipated in life and Attains to the Lord.
Singing the Lord's Praise, one’s mind becomes Sublime;
And one Merges, imperceptibly, in the Peace of Poise. /2/
No one can Serve the Lord in Duality.
In Ego, one eats but the poison of Maya.
And is seduced by the sons, the family and the home.
And thus the Blind and self-willed being comes and goes. /3/
He, who Receives, through the Saint, the Lord’s Name,
And Dwells day and night on the Lord’s Worship, through the Word,
He, the rare one, Knows the Essence of the Guru's Word,
And so Merges he in the (Lord's) Name. {4-12-32

Enter into the Abode of Truth through the True Name. [J]
8)
8)
I
8)
Fy
4
B
é)
]

Gauri Guareri M, 3

Through the four Ages, men have Served the Guru’;

(But), it is the Perfect one who does this Deed,

The Treasure of the Lord's Name is inexhaustible for him,

And he Receives Peace here and Glory Hereafter, [J]

O my mind, Doubt not,

And, through Service of the Gutu, Drink-in thou the Nectar (of the Lord’s Name). /J-Pause]
They, who Serve the Guru, are the great ones of the world ;

They Save themselves, nay, they Save their whole generation.

He, who keeps the Lord’s Name in the heart,

And is Imbued with the Name, Swims across the Sea of Existence. [2]

By Serving the Guru, the mind is subdued.

And the Ego departs and the Lotus (of one’s mind) flowers.

The Unstruck Music Rings (in one's mind) and one Abides in one's Self;

And, Imbued with the Lord's Name, he is Detached even while Attached. [3]

1. Guru is here identified with God and not with any human embodiment of Him.

eral

§ POSHSSOECOSOCEES

Page 203 . 
They, who Serve the Guru, are of True speech :
Through ages have the Devotees uttered thus.

They Dwell day and night on the Lord, the Supporter of the earth. P. 162
say? : patra with the Lord's Name, they become Detached’ and enter into the State of Bliss*,
4-35-33

Gauri Guareri M. 3

Fortunate is the one whom the Guru meets.

Into his mind comes the (Lord’s) Name and he Realises the Taste of the Lord. [J]
Through the Guru, he Contemplates the Lord's Essence,

And, so he is Victorious in life, for he carns nothing but the (Lord's) Name, /{/-Pause]
Sweet is the Lord's Wisdom, as is Concentration on the Guru's Word,

But rare is the one, who, by the Guru's Grace, Tastes the Word. /2/

One practises the way of works and pious conduct,

But cursed be the Ego (born of it), without the (Lord’s) Name. [3

Nanak : he, who is bound down and engrossed by Maya,

Is Released only through the Guru’s Wisdom, {4-J4-34/

Gauri Bairagan M. 3

It rains from above on the earth ; but does not the earth itself contain water ?
Within the earth is the water and so it is in the clouds running about, without feet. {J]
Shed thou such doubts, O dear !

For, as are his deeds, 0 becomes the man ;

And, the like merges) in its like. © {/-Pause]

What can a mere maf ora Woman do ? .

The Lord has myriads of forms, and they all Merge in Himalone, [2/

I was lost in Doubt birth after birth,

But when I Received the Lord, no more I was led astray.

He, whose work it is, He alone Knows it well’,

Or knows but he who Merges in the Guru's Word, [37

Thine is the Word, O Lord, Thow art of Thyself : why then Dwell in Doubt ?
Nanak : when the (man’s) essence Merges with the (Lord's) Essence,

There is then no birth after this birth’, {4-J/—-75-35]

Gauri Bairagan M. 3

All are subject to Time : all are bound to Duality.

And they all move in Ego; and, being Wilful, are Punished. [J]

O my mind, fix thy attention on the Guru’s Feet,

Cherish thou the Treasure of the (Lord's) Name, through the Guru,

And thou art Redeemed at the Lord's Court. {7-Pause]

They, who wander through myriads of species, being Self-willed, they come and go,

And Realise notl:he Guru's Word, and are cast again and agai into the womb. /[2}

When one Knows one’s Self by the Guru’s Grace and one Receives into one’s mind the Lord's Name,
One is Imbued, day and night, with the Lord’s Worship,

And is Merged in the Peace of Poise. /3/

When the mind is subdued through the Word, one Realises (the Truth) and sheds one’s Ego and Sin,
And, Nanak, by the Lord’s Grace, one Receives the Treasure of the (Lord's) Name. [4-2-J6-36] —

Gauri Bairagan M. 3

At thy Parents’ Home thy siay will not last long ; so is the Writ of the Lord.
Glorious is the Bride who Sings the Praises of the Lord, through the Guru.
At the Parent's Home, she who gathers Virtue,

Is Received with Honour at her In-laws.
. Through the Guru, she Merges in Peace,
And, she Loves the Lord in her mind. [J]
1. faaaes (fgeva) : without the companionship of another, ie., detached.
2. fagwel (Froarit) : Lit. the state of Nirvan, or dispassion (not extinction).
3. ug we (ve art) : knoweth (qe) well (ug, again),

4. usaf (greft) : (Sans. graf), once again.

Page 204 
[ 156 ]

He who Abides both here, and Hereafter, how shall we find Him ?

He the Immaculate Lord, is Unknowable : (but) of Himself He Unites us with Himself. (/-Pauwse
. 163

He of Himself Guides : and we Dwell on the Lord's Name,

By good Fortune, we meet with the True Guru, and Taste the Nectar-Name,

Our Ego and Duality then depart, and we Merge, imperceptibly, in the Peace of Poise.

Yea, He, of Himself, Does it all ; He, of Himself, Attunes us to the (Lord’s) Name. {27

The Self-willed Egotists Receive not (the Name) and abide in Ignorance,

They Serve not the True Guru, and so regret in the end.

They are cast into the womb again and again, and are thus wasted away.

So is the Will of my Creator, that the Self-willed be led astray. [3]

My Lord and Master has Himself Writ this in my Lot,

That I meet with the great Guru and Dwell on the (Lord's) Name.

The Lord's Name is my father and mother and brother and kindred.

O Lord, forgive me and Unite me with Thyself for, | am Thy humble Slave. [4-3-]7-37]

Gauri Bairagan M. 3

I received Wisdom from the Guru, and Dwelt on the Quintessence of the Lord,

The Darkened mind was Illumined by Meditating on the Name of the Lord.

The Lord Himself has Destroyed the Illusion (within me) and my Darkness is dispelled.
They, in whose Lot it was so Writ, they loved the Lord’s Name. /J/

How to find my Lord, O Saints, Seeing whom I live ?

I can live not for a moment without Him.

Unite me with the Guru that I Taste the Great Essence. / J-Pause]

I Sing the Praise of the Lord, Hear His Praise, and make the Lord the Ideal of my life,
I Tasted the Great Essence from the Guru who hath bewitched my body and mind.
Blessed is the Guru, the True Purusha, who has Blest me with the Lord’s Worship,

Yea, he (alone) is our Guru through whom we Attain to the Lord. 2]

The Lord is the Bestower of Virtue : we abide in Sin.

The Sinners sink like the stone : through the Guru's Word are they Saved,

Thou, O Lord, art Pure, the Giver of Virtue ; we abide ever in Error.

We seek Thy Refuge, O Lord, Save us ; for, Thou Savest even those who are stark Unwise, [3]
We find Peace and Joy through the Guru’s Word,

And in the Mind we Dwell ever on the Lord's Name.

And we Attain to the Friend. our Master,

And Sing His Praises in our (Mind's) Home.

Be Thou in Mercy, O Lord, that [ Cherish Thee ever.

Nanak secks the Dust of their Feet who have Attained to Thee, O Lord! /4-4—/8-38]

Gauri Guareri M. 4, Chaupadas

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Enlightener.

The Pundit recites the Smritis and the Shastras :

And the Yogi dwells on the Name of Gorakh ; '
But I, the poor one, Dwell only on the Lord's Name. [J]

I know not, O Lord, what is to become of me ?

(So) [ Dwell on Thee, my Lord, and Swim across the Sea of Existence, {J-Pause] -

The Sanyasin decks his body with the ashes ; P. 164
The celibate abandons the craving for another's woman, and practises celibacy.

(But) I, the simple one, O Lord, lean only on Thee. [2]

The Ashairiya does the deeds (of valour) and is called a warrior ;

The Vaishas and Shudras do the work for others.

(But), lo, 1 the meek one, am Saved by the Lord’s Name. [3]

In all Thy Creation Pervades Thy Self, O Lord,

And, Thou bestowest Glory on those who turn to Thee :

© Lord, Thou art the only Support for the Blind one like me. {4-JI-39]

oy

PIII IAIIS IIIA SII

, 3932329323292232390 Gurn-Granth Salih
Page 20
Gauri Guareri M. 4

Unutterable is the Praise of the Lord.

(O mind), repair to the Society of the Holy.

And Swim across the Sea of Existence and hear the Inefable Gospel of the Lord, [J]
He, the Lord, Unites thee with the Society of the Saints,

And thou utterest the Praise of thy God. /J-Pause/

They, who Dwell on Thy Name, O Lord,

Let me be the Slave of their Slaves.

Their Service to me is the only Pious deed. [2]

He, who Recites to me the Gospel of the Lard,

To him my mind clings tenaciously ;

And I consider myself Fortunate if I am Blest with the Dust of his Feet. [3/
They alone love the Saints of the Lord,

In whose Lot it is so Wnt by God :

And, such beings, OQ Nanak, Merge in the (Lord’s) Name, [4-2-40]

' Gauri Guareti M, 4

The mother is happy when her son has had his fill.

The fish is happy when she bathes herself in water.

The True Guru is happy when his disciple is Fulfilled. [J]

Unite us with those Thy Slaves, O Dear Lord,

Meeting whom all our Sorrows depart, [/-Pause]

As the cow is pleased at the sight of her calf,

And the bride is pleased when she sees her spouse home ;

So are the Lord’s Own pleased when they Sing the Praises of the Lord. [2]

The Charrik is pleased when it rains,

And the king is pleased seeing abundance of wealth,

But the Lord's Own are pleased when they Dwell on Thee,0 Formless Lord! [3]
All men are pleased when they earn more and more riches,

But the Guru's disciple is pleased when he takes the Guru in his Embrace ;

Nanak, the Lord's Slave, is Pleased when he Kisses the Feet of the Saints, {4-3-4}

Gauri Guareri M. 4

The beggar loves to ask for alms from the munificent.

The hungry one is pleased when he eats his fill ;

The Guru's disciple is satiated when he meets the Guru. [J]

] crave for Thy Sight, O Lord ; all my hope is on Thee.

Be Merciful and fulfil my Desire. [J-Pause/

The Chakvi is pleased when she sees the sun ;

And, meeting her beloved, she forgets all sorrow,

So does the Guru's disciple love to abide in the Guru's Presence. [2]
The calf is pleased when it sucks the mother’s milk :

And its mind flowers on seeing the cow, her mother,

So does the Guru's disciple love to abide in the Guru's Presence. [3
All other loves are false, impermanent and Maya's delusion,

For the false (objects of love) but pass away.

So, Nanak is satiated only when he loves the True Lord. [4—4-42]

Gauri Guareri M, 4

Blessed is the Service of the True Guru P. 165
Meeting whom I Dwell on the Name of my Lord and Master.

They, who Meditate on the Lord, Redeem many more. [i]

© my brothers, the-disciples of the Guru, utter ye the Lord's Name.

That all your Sins are Washed off. = /J-Pause]

When I met the Guru, my mind was held, .

And I Dwelt on the Lord and departed from within me the Five (Desires).

And, every day, my body echoed the Lord's Praise.

Guru-Granth Sahib 99999999000999999999999009999999999929223999900904
Page 20
{3
4
3
)

5

’
‘
3
©
a
a
‘4
‘
©
©
C
<
(5
“
5
.
i
©
c

(3

[ 158 ]

They, who applied the Dust of the Guru's Feet to their countenances,
Shed all Falsehood, and Attuned themselves to the Lord,

And were Acclaimed at the Lord's Court. [3]

The Lord Loves one’s Service of the Guru.

Even Ariskna and Balrama took to the Feet of the Guru,

Nanak : the Lord Himself Saves us through the Guru. /4-5-43]

Gauri Guareri M. 4

He, the Lord, Himself is the Yogi, the keeper of the staff.

He is the flower-girt Master of the woods! who Pervades all,

He, the Lord, it is who Himself Concentrates* on Himself,

Such is my Lord, the All-filling,

Who Abides so near me, and is never afar. {/-Pause/

He, the Lord, is the Word, He the one Attuned to its Music ; —
He Himself Sees ; He Himself Blossoms forth.

Yea, He Himself Meditates upon Himself and makes others Dwell upon Him. [2]
He Himself is the Chatrik-bird, He Himself the rain of Nectar ;

He Himself makes us Drink His Ambrosial Drink.

He, the Lord, Himself Saves all,

He Himself is the Boat, the Raft, the Boatman,

He Himself Saves us through the Guru’s Word.

He, the Lord, Himself makes us Swim across (the Sea of Existence). {4-6-44]

Gauri Bairagan M. 4

Thou, O Master, art my King : whatever Thou Givest, that I Receive.

With Love, I Deal in Thy Name when Thou art Merciful to me. [J]

lam the Pedlar of the Lord,

He, the Lord, Bestows upon me the Capital-stock wherewith I Trade, [/—-Pause]
And I earn the Profit of His Worship and the True Lord is Pleased,

And I Dwell on Him and | gather the Goods (of Good),

And the Yama, the tax-gatherer’, cyes me not. [2]

The others but deal in Maya and end up in great Sorrow :

(For), they reap only what they had sown. /3/

He alone Deals in the Lord’s Name,

On whom is the Mercy of the Lord.

Nanak Worships the Lord, his Master, and so he is asked not to render his Account to Him. /4-J-7-45]

Gauri Bairagan M. 4

The mother conceives in the hope of begetting a son ;

Then he prows up and earns wealth and enjoys himself,

So does our Lord keep us in His Love, Supporting us with His Hands. [JJ

O my Lord, I am Unwise, Bless me with Thy Grace.

For, the Glory of Thy Slave is the Glory of Thyself. /J-—Pawse] P. 166
He, who loves the Lord's Praise in his mind, has Joy in his Home.

To him everything tastes sweet, for, he Sings the Lord's Praise,

The Lord's Servant Saves himself and all his kins, nay, he Saves the whole world. , 2/

O Lord, all that happens is in Thy Will; all is Thy Glory.

All the creatures are Thine and Thou makest them Worship-Thee. ..

And they find the Treasure of Thy Name, for, Thou Thyself Bestowest it on them, —{3] —. -

Thy Slave, who was bought over by Thee at the bid, can he, O Lord, play clever with Thee 7? ———.——
Make Thou me a king or a grass-cutter, I will ever and for ever Call on Thee, a

For, all is Thy Glory, O Lord. and Nanak is Thy Slave. /4-2-8-46]

aed! (avait) : Lit, he whose garland is the Forest, Vishnu, i.e., God.
atal (art)=aral ; absorption '= devotion or thought.

waral (art) ; Lit. he who gather. ‘aars' (religious levy).

org (Ava) : (Persian), slave.

bw

2200 Guru-Granth Sahi
pe

[ 159 ]

Gauri Guareri M. 4

The farmer loves to farm with all his heart.

He tills the land and puts in his best that his offspring be fed well.

So does the Lord’s Servant Dwell on the Lord, that he be Saved in the end. [J]
Redeem me, the Ignorant fool, O my Lord,

And Yoke me to the Service of the Guru, [J-Pause]}

The Merchant goes out to Trade with his horses,

And earns wealth and builds hopes and strengthens his love of Maya.

So does the Lord's Servant Utter the Name of the Lord, and attains Bliss, [2]

The merchant, who gathers the Poison of Maya in his trade,

Is involved in the mazes of Avarice.

But the Lord's Servant gathers and expends the True Wealth of the Lord’s Name. /3]
One's attachment to the family is Maya and one is ensnared thus by Duality.

He alone is Saved through the Guru's Word, who is the Slave of His Slaves.

Nanak Dwells on the (Lord's) Name and, through the Guru, his mind is IIlumined. /{4-3-9-47]

; Gauri Bairagan M, 4

Deluded by Illusion, one is gripped by Avarice, night and day ;

And one carries about the load (of Maya) like a bond-slave.

He, who Serves the Guru, is Blest with the Devotion to his Within. [JJ

O my Lord, break off my Fetters of Maya ; and Bless me with the Service of Thy Home,

That I Sing ever Thy Praise and Merge in Thy Name, [/-Pause]

When a man serves a king, it is only to earn riches ;

The king may bind him down or punish him, or he may himself die:

But Blessed is the Service of the True Guru, through which one Dwells on the Lord, the God, and attains
(eternal) Peace. /2/ ;
We trace, each day, to earn profit,

And when we earn profit, we are at peace ; in loss, our heart breaks.

But he, who shares the Guru's Virtues, attains nothing but Gladness. [3]

The more we crave for other tastes, the more is our hunger’; PF. 167
But he, on whom is the Lord’s Grace, Sells his head off to the Guru;

And then, Nanak, the Lord’s Servant is satiated and Desire gnaws at his heart no more. {4-4-]0-48]

Gauri Bairagan M. 4

In my mind is Thy Desire, O Lord, how am | to See Thee?

They alone, who Love Thee, know how much is my Desire for Thee.

Sacrifice am I unto the Guru who United me, the Separated one, to Thee, my Creator. [i]
© Lord, we are Sinners; we seek the Refuge of Thy Door,

That Thou, in Thy Mercy, may Unite us with Thyself. //-Pause]

Our Sins are countless ;

Thou art the Treasure of Virtue.

Forgive us in Thy Mercy that we may Love Thee ;

And, in the Society of the Holy, we, the Sinners, Reccive this Instruction that the Name of the Lord
Redeems us all. /2/ .

How am I to describe Thy Merits, O my True Guru :

When we Utter Thy Name, we enter into the Realm of Wonder.

Who else can Save Sinners like us but Thou ?

For, Thou art our Father, Mother, Kin, Friend and our only Support. {3/

Thou knowest what would be our state without Thee, O True Guru,

We would have tottered about, helplessly, without Thy support,

O Blessed Thou, who has raised us, worms, to Thy own Slate.

Blessed, Blessed, is the Guru, Nanak, meeting whom all our Woes depart, /4-5-/J-49]

Gauri Bairagan M, 4

One is attached to one’s wife, beauteous like gold ; sweet thus becomes the love of Maya :
And one’s mind is enticed by the temple of a home, and the horses of pleasure!,
But, if one keeps not the Lord in the mind, how is onc to be Emancipated 7? [J]

1, Am alternative rendering would be : “By the temples (castles), houses, horses, pleasures.”
Guru-Granth Salih 999999909929999999990999999999999999900099999090"

Page 20

BEGASSCE ECO CSSSSSSOC SOSCOAAHAGAGEAECEGOAE CE BECOCO CEOS ECOSSCBOSCOCESESSOGSSGOEGEGOOGE

ha
[ 160 ]

© my Lord, such worthless are my deeds

Thou, the Beneficent Lord art the Treasure of Virtue : Forgiev me in Thy Mercy. [J-Pause]
I neither have beauty, nor (high) caste, nor right is my way :

What shall then ] speak of myself devoid of Virtue, who has Dwelt never on Thy Name ?
We, the Sinners, are Saved by the True Guru :

This, indeed, is the way of his Beneficence. [2]

Thou Gavest me life and body and a beauteous form, and the cool water to drink,

And the food to eat, and the clothes to wear, and other Joys to enjoy.

But I remember not Thee who Givest :

And think I, animal-like, that [ brought these myself to myself. [3]

Thy Will alone Works : O Thou, the Inner-knower !

What can we, mere creatures, do? Thine is all this Play.

So Nanak has sold himself off at Thy Shop and he is now Thy Bond-slave. [4-6-J2-50/ P. 168

Gauri Bairagan M. 4

As the mother brings up her son and keeps him always im view ;

She feeds him constantly and caresses him every moment ;

So does the True Guru keep a follower eternally in the Love of the Lord. /[J/

O Lord, we are Thy innocent babes ;

Blesset o Guru Teacher, art thou who, instructing us in the Lord’s Wisdom, has made us wise.
i=-Pause

As the white-robed swallow thai trails across the skies,

Keeps her offspring ever in her mind ;

So does the Guru love his followers and Cherishes them in his heart. [2/

The tongue of flesh and blood encased by the thirty-two teeth,

O, what is in the power of this tongue ? All is within the Power of the Lord,

The tongue that slanders the Saints (can do no harm) :

For, the Lord is there to. Save the Honour of His Devotees. [3]

© brothers, know ye that all is in the Hands of the Lord.

Age, death, disease, pain and damnation are in the Power of God : none else can do thee harm.

Dwell thou then on the Lord’s Name that Saves all in the end. = /4-7-I3-5/]

Gauri Bairagan M. 4

He, on meeting whom one receives all Joy, He alone is the True Guru.

Through Him, the mind's Duality departs and one attains to the highest Bliss. [J]

How is my beloved, the True Guru, to be met ?

I salute him ever and for ever and ask : “How shalt thou be met, O dear!" [J-—Pause]
The Lord, in his Mercy, United me with the True Guru : :

And, with the Dust of the Guru's Feet, all my desires were sated. [2]

And I Hearkened to, and Enshrined, the Worship of the Lord through the Guru :

And I suffered no loss ever and earned rich Profit.

He, whose heart is in Bloom and knows no Duality,

Nanak 5 meet sow that Guru that Saves thee, and thou Singest ever the Praises of the Lord.

Gauri Poorbi M, 4

The Lord in His Mercy was Beneficent and He Blest me with the Word! ;
And I was Dyed in the fast crimson Colour (of God) and so my Robes sparkled, [J]
. I am the Bond-slave of my Lord.
When my mind was Pleased with the Lord,
The whole world became a Slave unto me, without a price. [J-Pause]
Discriminate® ye, O Saints, and search ye your hearts.
For the Light of the Lord Pervades all; how near, how near is He! [2] ‘
Near, too near, is He to all the world: He, the Yonder Lord, beyond Measure. P. 169
The Lord was Revealed to me by the Guru to whom I have sold myself off. £3]
© Thou, Highest of the high, ..“*+out and within I seek Thy Refuge.
Nanak Dwells ever on Thy Praise on meeting Thy Counsel®, the Guru, /4-]-/5-53]

1. Sel (are) : fir. speech,

2. fata (frag) : (Sans. fata), gnosis, spn * “" cwakening, sense of discrimination.
3. Sas) Grab) : fit, the middle-man,

DOO) oy QO DODIDIB DIDO 2390 Gurn-Granth Salih
Page 209
Gauri Poorbi M. 4

O, Thou Life of life, Yonder of the yond, the Master of the Universe, the Maker of our Destiny,
Whichever Way Thou Leadest me, that Way I go.

My Mind is Imbued with the Lord's Love :

I Received the Lord’s Taste in the Socicty of the Holy,

And so Merged in the Lord's Name. /{J—Pause ]

The Lord’s Name is the Cure-all for all, the Harbinger of Peace,

And all their Pain departs, who Taste the Essence of the Lord. [2]

They, in whose Lot it was so Writ, bathed in the Guru's Pool of Contentment :

And they shed all their mind’s Evil who were Immersed in the Lord’s Love. [3]

O Lord, my Master, who is all by Himself, there is no one as Beneficent as art Thou;
Nanak lives by Thy Name with which he is Blest by Thee Thyself, {4-2-J6-34/

Gauri Poorbi M. 4

Take Pity on me, O Life of all life, the Beneficent Lord, that my Mind is filled with Thee.
So Pure is the Word of the Guru that my Mind is in ecstasy, Meditating on the Lord. [J]
My Mind and body are Pierced through with the Lord’s Love,

I am Saved from the all-consuming Death through the Guru’s Word, /{J-Pause]

They, who Love not the Lord, are the worshippers of Maya.

They are born to die again and over again, and they are Wasted away, abiding in Dirt. [2]
© Thou, the Beneficent Lord, I seek Thy Refuge, O my Sustainer,
Bless me that I seek nothing but Thy Name :

And make me Thy Slave that I dance to Thy Tune, [3]

Thou art the Master, the Merchant-King, and I am Thy Pedlar.'

All my life, my mind and all I have, are Thine, O Thou, my True Lord. [4-3-17-55]

Gauri Poorbi M. 4

O Thou, the Beneficent Lord, the Dispeller of Pain, hear Thou my Plaint :

Unite me with the True Guru, my Life, from whom I get to Know Thee. [J]

O Lord, the True Guru and Thouw art one:

We are stark Ignorant, Purblind in mind,

Through the True Guru's Word art Thou Revealed. / J-Pause] P17

All the other tastes I tasted were insipid,
But Thy Nectar-taste Received through the Guru, is sweet like sugar-cane’s. [2]

They, who met not the True Guru, are madcaps, lovers of Maya :
And, such was their wretched lot that (like moths), they burnt themselves in the fire, lured by Lust. [3]

They, on whom is Thy Mercy, O Lord, they Met Thee : and Dedicated themselves to Thy Service.
Meditating on Thee, Nanak’s mind was Illumined and, through the Guru’s Word, he Merged in Thy
Name, [4-4-18-56] ;

Gauri Poorbi M. 4

O my mind, the Lord is for ever with thee: how can one escape His Presence ?

The True One, of Himself, Forgives and of Himself Redeems all. [1]

O my mind, Dwell on the Lord’s Name :

And Seek the Refuge of the Lord that you are Saved through"the Guru, /{i-—Pause]
Serve the Giver of all Peace that you Dwell in your own Self,

And enter into your Home by rubbing, Chandan-like, (the Lord’s Name) into your (mind). [2]
O my mind, Blessed is the Lord’s Praise; it Pleases the Mind.

When He, the Lord, is in Mercy, we Partake of the Taste of Nectar, [3]

But they, who take to the Other, fall into the grip of the Yama.

Go not near unto them, O my mind, for, they are the evil Thieves, [4/

O my mind, Serve the Unknowable, Immaculate, Man-lion, thy Lord,

That all your past is Washed off,

The Lord Makes us Perfect, O Nanak, that we are less by nothing. /{3-5-J9-57]

Gauri Poorbi M. 4

My life is Thine, O Lerd, and all my body and Soul:
I crave immensely for Thy Vision, O God, Pray Keep me in Thy Presence. [J]

Page 210 
[ 162 ]

My desire to Meet Thee is intense, O God,

The Guru in his Mercy Unites me to Thee, my Lord. //-Pause]

That what is in my mind Thou Knowest, O Lord !

I Dwell on Thy Name day and night: [ leari only on Thee. [2]

The munificent Guru showed the Path that led me to my Lord, ; ;

And all my Desires were fulfilled, and night and day [ was im utter Joy, Blest with a great Destiny. [3]
O Thou, the Master of the universe, the Creator, the Sustainer of the world,

All, all, isin Thy Power.

Tseck Thy Refuge, O Lord, now Save my Honour. [4-6-20-58]

Gauri Poorbi M, 4

The mind is never held; it wears many garbs and wears off, wandering in all the ten directions. P. 171
When one meets the Guru by good Fortune, he endows one: with the Mantram of Peace. [1]

O Lord, Iam the Slave of the True Guru. [/-Pause] ; ;

For my indebtedness to him is great, (and) on my forehead is the stamp of (his ownership).

He was Beneficent and Merciful to me, and so I Swam across the impassable Sea of Fear, [2]

He, who loves not the Lord, all his other attachments are false. ;

As the paper is dissolved in water, so are the Egocentrics wasted away by their Ego. [3]

We knew not a thing, nor know now, and stand where He wants usto be, ;

Forgive the shortcomings of Nanak in thy Mercy, O Guru, for he keeps Faith with thee like pes 59]

Gauri Poorbi M. 4

Lust and Anger infest the city (of the body),

But when | meet with the Saints, I break through both.

I was Destined to meet with the Guru,

And so I am filled with the Love of God. [J] ;

Salute, with joined palms, the Saints, "tis an act of great Merit;

Lie prostrate before them, {1-Pause]

The worshippers of Shakti do not Relish the Taste of God,

For in their hearts is the Thorn of I-amness.

And, as they walk along, it Hurts them and they Grieve and suffer the pangs of Death. /2]
Those, who are God's Own, are Merged in His Name,

They have cast away the pangs of birth and death.

I've found God, the Deathless, whose Glory is writ across all the worlds and universes, (3)
We the poor, meek ones, belong to Thee, O Lord,

Save us, O save us, Thou Highest of the high. ~

Thy Name is Nanak's only Mainstay, and in Thy Name lies his Peace. /{4-8-22-60]

Gauri Poorbi M. 4

In the fortress (of the body) is the Lord, our King,

But the shameless (mind) knows not His Taste.

But when the Lord, the Blesser of the poor, is in Mercy,

I Relish His Taste through the Guru's Word. [J/

O Lord, when, Attuned to the Guru, I Sing Thy Praise, how sweet Thou seemest! //-Pause]

Thou art Unknowable, beyond Comprehension, Transcendent :

Through the Guru, his Counsel, art Thou Met.

He, who loved the Word of the Guru in the heart,

Before him was Thy Presence made Manifest®, [2]

The heart of the Egocentric is hard, and black from within,

If one feeds a serpent upon milk, poisonous still is its sting. {3

© Lord, Unite me with the Guru-Saint, that I rub into my soul the Mantram of the Word,

Nanak is the Slave of the Lord, and, joining the Society of the Holy, the Sour seems Sweet to him,

‘ {4-9-23-81]

1. aad =( ! wad, : offspring of a dog. Or may be, in order to meet the exigencies of the rhyme-scheme,

has been rendered as m=) we ad
2. uate (waar) : (Sans. tfefass), fit. td Surround,

. 228290 Guru-Granth Sahib
Page 21
Gauri Poorbi M. 4

I sold myself off to the Perfect Guru for the sake of my Lord,

And the Lord’s Name was Enshrined in me through the beneficent Guru.

How fortunate now am I! [J]

Through the Guru is one United with the Lord. //-Pause] P. 172

The Lord Pervades every heart : through the Guru's Word is one Attuned to Him.

I offer my body and mind to the Guru that my Doubt and Fear depart through His Word. /2/

The Darkness is Illuminated © through the Guru's Wisdom is one Attuned to Him.

And as the Darkness of Ignorance is dispelled, the mind is Awakened and one Receives the (Lord's)
Truth in one's very Home. /3/

The worshippers of power, the hunters (of others), the gatherers of wealth, all of these the Yama keeps

in the eye.

(For), they seit. not their heads off to the True Guru and so they, the Unfortunate ones, come and
go.
Listen thou to my Prayer, O my Master, I seek Thy Refuge : ay

Thou art my Saviour, My honour, and [ am a Sell-off to Thee, /5-/0-24-62]
Gauri Poorbi M. 4

T abide in Ego : Darkened is my mind with Ignorance :

But, Meeting with the Guru, my Ego is stilled.

Blessed is the Guru-God, the King, who makes me shed my Ego and I attain Peace. [J]
I Received the Lord through the Guru's’ Word . {1-Pause/

In my heart.is the Love of the Lord ; ‘tis the Guru who showed me the Path,

_ All my body and mind are the Guru's : He United me, the Separated one, with the Lord, [2]
Within my heart is the Desire to Sce my Lord: lo, the Guru made me See Him, within my heart,
And my Mind is in ecstasy and Peace ; O, Iam a Sell-off to the Guru. /3/

Tam a Sinner of sinners ; I break my faith and thieve.

Says Nanak, “I seek now the Refuge of the Lord ; Keep Thou my Honour, O Lord, in Thy Love.“
[4-11-25-63]

Gauri Poorbi M, 4

Through the Guru's Word Rings the Unstruck Music ;
Through the Word does the Mind Sing.

By good Fortune, I perceived the Lord's Vision.
Blessed is the Guru who Attunes me to my Lord: /J/
Yea, the God-wards are Attuned to their God. {/-Pausej
My master, the True Guru, is Perfect :

My Mind is ever Dedicated to the Service of the Guru,
I Wash the Feet of the great Guru,

Who Recites to me the Gospel of the Lord. [2]

In my heart is the Guru's Word, the Lord’s Cure-all,
My tongue ever Utters His Praise,

And my Mind is pleasantly sated with the Essence,
And hunger no more gnaws at my heart. /3/

Try as one may, one Receives not the (Lord's) Name
Without the Lord's Mercy.

Wanek is Blest with the Lord's Gruce,
And, through the Guru's Word, he has Enshrined the Name in the Mind. f4-12-26- 64)

Rag Gauri Majh M, 4

O my life, do this Deed alone ; Dwell theu on the Name, by the Guru’s Grace.

Make thy Mind thy Mother that teaches thee to keep ever the Lord's ame on thy tongue.

And make Patience thy Father, and thy Guru the Lord Immortal. P, 173
And so Meet thou the Lord, by good Fortune. [//

I have met my Guru, the Yogi. and [ revel in His Joy.

He is Imbued with the Lord’s Love and abides ever in-Nirvan?,

Cf “This isthe real, ius is the excellent, namely the oy saa muses , the casting out of all ‘basis‘, ihe

extinction of craving, dispassion, stopping, Nirvan’. (Angutrara-nikaya, v
According to the Sikh credo, Nirvan is the blowing out of desires and abiding in Bliss while yet alive, or being |

detached and yet attuched, and is not a stete of non-existence or annihilation.

Guru-Granth Salih 99VDI9I’II9999999999299999999999999020220990908
Page 21
COSCOCCESOCECEECCEEEEECOCEOCEEO

reretcrore cee GGT

Page 213

[ 164 ]

By great, good Fortune, I meet the Wise Seer.

And my body and Mind are [mbued with the Love of the Lord. [2]

Come, O Saints, let us gather to Dwell upon the (Lord's) Name ;

And, in the Society of the Holy, earn the Profit of the Lord's Name,

And Serve the Saints and Taste the (Lord's) Nectar.

But we meet the Holy if it is so Writ in our Lot by God, [3]

In the month of Shravan, the sky is overcast with the cloud of the Nectar-Name ;
And the mind's Peacock dances to the tune of the Word ;

The Nectar rains and the Lord, our King, is Met,

And -Ninak is Imbued with His Love. [¢-J-27-65]

Gauri Majh M. 4

Come, friends, let us weave the charms! of (the Lord's) Praise,

And, meeting the Saints, Enjoy ourselves in Joy ;

That the Light of the Guru's Wisdom may burn bright in us ;

And the Lord, in His Mercy, is moved to come down to Meet us. [JJ
My mind and body are Imbued with the Love of my Spouse,

The Guru, the intercessor, has United me with my Friend.

T give away my mind to the Saints,

Who Unite me with my Master.

lam ever a Sacrifice unto the Lord. {2/

O my Love, O my Govind, be Thou in Mercy,

And Abide ever in my mind:

That I Receive my heart's Desire,

And my mind blossoms forth on seeing the Perfect Guru.

O my Govind, the Bride, that Receives Thy Name,

Is eternally in a mysterious Bliss. .

When, by good Fortune, is my Lord Met,

My mind reaps the Profit of Eternal Gladness. [3

He, the Lord Himself Creates and Sees and Assigns work to all :

Some are Blest with the unlimited abundance of His Grace,

While the others Receive but a handful (of it).

Some are seated by Him on the Kingly throne (of His Grace) and are ever happy,
While others but Beg (misery) from door to door.

His Word alone Pervades all :

So Nanak, the Lord's Slave, Dwells only on the (Lord's) Name, {4-2-28-66]

Gauri Majh M, 4

My mind, O my Govind’, is Imbued with Thy Love :

Thy Love, O Lord, is with us, but we know not ;

For Thou, the Unknowable, art Known (only) through the Guru.

When the Lord’s Name illumines ourselves,

And our Poverty and Pain depart,

And we Merge in the Name by good Fortune,

And attain to the sublime State (of Bliss). {J

O my dears, have you, O have you seen my Spouse with thine eyes, thine own eyes ?
Sadness fills my heart,

My body and mind have withered without him. P. 174
Meeting with the Saints, O my Govind,

1 See my Master, my Beloved, my Kin.

And when I Join with Him, the Life of all life, OQ my Govind,

My night passes in Peace. /2/

1. we (*OTT) : (Sans. erie), charm.

h 2. This isa popular folk refrain and is mot to be fitted literally into the text, It merely gives a soothing lilt to
the song.

90 Guru-Gramth Salih
O Saints, Unite me with my Master, my Friend :
My body and mind bunger for Him,

I live not without Seeing Him, my Beloved,

(For), within me is the pang of Love :

I Meet my Friend, my King, through the Guru ;
And my Mind awakens to (Eternal) life.

And the desires of my baad and Mind are Fulfilled,

And the Mind Sings with the ots of Marriage, [3]
Sacrifice am I unto Thee, O my Govind, a myriad times ;
My body and mind are Imbued with Thy Love ;
Save my Soul, my Lord,
And. Unite me with the True Guru, Thy Councel,
That he Leads' me on to Thee, O my Govind !
And I Receive Thy Name, in Thy Mercy,
When Nanak seeks Thy Refuge. [4-3-29-67]
Gauri Majh M. 4

Wonderful is my Lord, O my dear’,
And wonderful is His Play. '
He, of Himself, Creates Krishna, (the Beloved), i
And of Himself becomes a Gopi, the seeker.
He Himself Enjoys in every heart :
He Himself is the Enjoyer (of all Joy).
And, being Wise, He’s deluded not,
For, He, the True Guru, is the Yogi of Yogis. [J]
He of Himself Creates the universe,
And Himself Plays He in many many Ways.
Some He Makes to revel in Joy,
The others he Makes to wander Naked about.
He, of Himself, is the Creator,
And He, the Beneficent One, Blesses all with His Grace.
His Worshippers crave for nothing but His Name,
And they Dwell on the Pleasing Gospel of the Lord. [2]
He, of Himself, Makes His Devotees Worship Him,
And Fulfils He’ all their Desires,
And Pervades He all the earth and the waters : yea, He’s near, not far.
Within and without is He the Lord alone ; it is He who Fills all places.
The Lord is All-permeating.
And He Sees His Presence Himself, all over.. [3]
Within us is the Music of the air,
And it Rings to His Tune.
Within us 1s the Treasure of the Name,
But it is Revealed to us through the Guru's Word,
He himself takes us into His Sanctuary, ;
Himself He Saves our Honour, P, 175
And by good Fortune, we meet with the Holy,
And all our Tasks are Fulfilled. {4-—4-30-68/]
Gauri Majh M, 4
The Lord has put in me the Desire to seek the (Lord’s) Name.
And, when my Lord and Friend Meets me, J am in utter Peace,
1 live to See the Sight of my Lord, O my mother,
For the Lord’s Name is my Friend, my Brother, fy
O Saints, Sing ye the Praises of the Lord.
And Dwell on the Name, through the Guru, that your Fortune shines forth.
The Lord's Name is my life’s breath :
(Holding on to it), | venture not out again upon the Sea of Existence. [2]
How may I See my Lord is the craving of my Soul.
Unite me, O Saints, with the Lord : ] am immensely in Love with Him.
We find Him, our Dear one, our King, through the Guru's Word,
And, Meditating on His Name, our Fortune becomes great. [3]

I. garat (tart) ; (Persian gaedt), showing the path,
2. _The words "“O my Govind” at the end of cach line are a mere refrain and need not be taken literally.

Gupu-Grenth Sahib 99099992009599009929209099999999990022099090099"

BP ISESCCECSSSSSSO SESE COSHSHESSOSOSEPOOCEE ESE SESECOSECEOSOS

Page 21
[ 166 ]

Great, O great, is the Desire in my mind, to See the Lord.

© Saints, Unite me with my Master who Liveth so near to me,
When through the Guru's Wisdom, the mind is lllumined,

The Desire of one's mind, Nanak, is then Fulfilled, [4-5-3/-69/

Gauri Majh M. 4

If I Receive my Love, the Lord's Name, I live ;

And I Suck-in the Nectar that is within my Mind.

The Lord's Name is Revealed to me, and uttered through the Guru's Word,
Then, my mind is ever Imbued with the Lord's Love,

And I Drink ever the Essence of the Lord

O, I live only if | Receive my God. [1] :
The Lord's Love has pierced, like an arrow, through my body and Mind :
Yea, my Lord, who is All-wise, my Beloved and Friend.

With Him through the Guru-Saint do I Unite.

Tam a Sacrifice unto my Lord's Name. [27

‘© Friends, Lead me on to the Path that takes me to my Life-mate.

I search Him out all about : tell me, pray, O Saints, whither may I go?
Lo, the True Guru, in His Mercy, shows the Way and I find the Lord,
And, through the Lord's Name, I Merge in the Name, /3/

I was Blest with the Pain of the Lord’s Love by the Lord Himself ;

And the Guru Fulfilled my Desire and I Sucked-in the Nectar (within me).
And the Lord was in Mercy and | Dwelt on the Lord’s Name :

And I Tasted the Essence of the Lord. {4-6-20-/8-32-70}

Rag Gauri Guareri, Chaupadas, M. 5

\By the Grare of the @ne Supreme Being, ihe Eternal, the Bulightener.

How shall J be in Joy, O my brother ?

How shall I find the Lord, the Mainstay of all? /{/-Pause]

Due to the love of Maya, my mind is not at Peace,

And my high mansions are as a beautiful shadow.

In vain have I wasted my life, in greed. [J]

I am joyed at the sight of the horses and the elephants, P. 176
And the gathering of the armies and the royal assistants :

(But) these are like a noose of vanity round my neck, [2]

One may have sway over all the world,

And may revel in all kinds of joy, and enjoy many’ beautiful women :
But he is like a king turned beggar in a deat. [3]

The True Guru showed me the Way to Bliss,

That I submit, like the Lord’s Devotee, to the Will of the Lord.
Stilling on's Ego, one Merges (in the Real). /4) [4]

Thus is how the Bliss is attained, O my brother :

‘Thus is Attamed the Lord, the Supporter of all. /J-Second Pause]

Gauri Guareri M, 5

Why are we in Doubt ? Why are we led astray ?

When He, the Lord, Pervades the earth, the waters, and the interspace.
Saved are the God-wards : the self-wards Jose themselves. [J]

He, whom the Lord, the Beneficent, Himself Protects,

Him no one can equal. /J-Pause]

All over Pervades He, the [nfinite,

Rest thou then in Peace, shedding thy care.

For, He Knows all that happens. /2/ ;

The seli-wards are lost, for, they love the Other, ‘
They wander through many births : for, such is their Evil lot, Ordained by God.
(But), they reap (only) what they have sown.

Page 21
My mind was Illumined Seeing the Vision of the Lord.
For lo, I Saw the Presence of Lord, the God,,
And so was! Fulfilled. /4-2-7/]

Gauri Guareri M. 5

For several births thou wert a mere worm,

For several births an elephant, a fish, a deer ;

For several births a bird, a serpent,

For several births yoked as a bull’, a horse. [JJ

Mect thou the Lord of the universe, for, now is the time.

After ages hast thou attained to the glory of the human birth. [J-Pause]
Birth after birth one became a rock, a mountain,

Birth afler birth was he destroyed in the womb,

Birth after birth he was decked with leaves :

And wandered through myriads of species. [2]

Through the Society of the Holy, one became a man,

Let him Serve now (the Lord) and Dwell upon the Guru's Word.

Shed thy vanity and falsehood, O man,
And die to thy self to be Approved at the Lord's Court. /3/
O Lord, whatever happens, flows from Thee,

For none else is there to do, or be,

1 Unite with Thee when it is in Thy Will.
And then [ Dwell ever on Thy Praise. [4-3-72]

In the field of Karma?, sow thou the Seed of the (Lord’s) Name,
That thy Destiny is Fulfilled,
And reap thou the Fruit of Release from Death,
And Sing ever the Praises of the Lord.. {J}
Keep the Lord's Name in thy heart, .
And all thy tasks will be Fulfilled in an instant. //-Pause]
He thou conscious of thy Lord,

And, thot art Honoured at His Court,
Shed thy cleverness and contention, ;

And take to the Feet of the Saints. [2] P.i77
He, who Supports all life with His Hands,

And who Separates not from anyone and is ever with thee ;

Seek thou His Refuge shedding all other cfforts,

And, in an instant, thou art redeemed. i

Know Him to be near unto thee for ever;

And submit with joy to His Will. *

And, through the Guru's Word, obliterate thy self,

And so Dwell ever on the Lord's Name. /4-4-73]

Gauri Guareri M, §

The Guru's Word ts clernal and abides for ever.

Through the Guru's Word ts loosed the Yama's noose.

The Guru's Word keeps company with the Soul.

Through the Guru's Word is one Imbued with the Lord's Love. [I]
That what the Guru Blesses thee with, is of use to thy mind,

That what the Saint imparts, take thou it as Truth. /{/-Pause]

The Guru's Word is Eternal and [Immutable :

Through the Guru's Word is all our Doubt dispelled,

The Guru's Word stays for ever with thee,

Through the Guru's Word, doth one Sing the Praises of the Lord. [2]

1. fey (ger) : (Sans. yra:) bull.

2. The human body is sometimes referred to as the ficld of action (Karma), a3 it is in this form that one reaps
whal one sows.

Cf. “This body is the field of Karma", (Bilawal M, 4),

é)
J
of
ca]
3
&)
3
Gauri Guareri M. 5 3
3
3
i)
)
€)
e)
é)
al
é)

yy ey a as ay a as

oe

a
1]
co
2
2
2
®)
*)

Page 21
The Guru's Word pi company with thy Soul,

The Guru's Word is the Support of the supportless.

Through the Guru's Word one is Saved from Hell. ba
Through the Word doth one’s tongue Relish the Nectar (of the Lord’s Name). [3/

O, the Guru's Word, is manifest in the universe,

Through the Guru's Word, one suffers not Defeat.

Nanak : he on whom is the Guru in Mercy,

On him is also the Grace of the Lord. * [4-35-74]

Gauri Guareri M. 5

He, who made thee a Jewel out of the dust,

He, who Kept thee safe in the mother's womb ;

He, who gave thee greatness and glory,

Dwell thou on Him, night end day. /J/

O Lord, if I am Blest with the Dust of the Saint-Guru’s Feet,
Meeting him, I would Dwell on Thee, my Master! {J-Pause]

He who made me, the ignorant fool, a man of fine speech,

He who brought consciousness to the unconscious,

He by whose Grace 1 was Blest with the nine Treasures,

Let my mind forget not that Lord, [2]

He who gave Shelter to the homeless,

He who brought Honour to the meek,

He who fulfilled all thy desires,

Dwell theu on Him with every breath, every morse! of thy feed, [3/
He, by whose Grace thy Fetters of Maya are cut off,

And by whose Grace hath bitter Poison truned into Nectar, (Dwell thou on Him).
Says Nanak, “This (mortal) can do not a thing :

Praise, therefore, Him who Gives life to all”, {4-6-75]

Gauri Guareri M. 5

In the Sanctuary of the Lord. there is neither Fear nor Sorrow.

For, nothing can happen which He does not Will.

I have shed the evils of power, cleverness and (pride of) intellect,

And now He, my Lord, Protects the Honour of His Slave, [//

Dwell, O my mind, on the Lord with Love :

For, He keeps thee company within thy home and without. [| /-Pause]
Lean only on His Support in thy mind.

And Taste the Nectar of the Guru’s Word. P. 178
Of what avail are thy other efforts ?

For, He, in His Mercy, Protects thy Honour, [2/

Say, what power a mere mortal has ?

Vain, O vain, is the tumult of Maya.

He, the Master, alone Does and Makes others do ;

Yea, He, the Inner-knower of all hearts. /3/]

Of all pleasures, this is what stays with us :

That we keep the Guru's Word in our Mind,

Nanak : “He, who is Attuned to the Name of the Lord,”

“He, of all, is the one Blest by God.” [4-7-76]

Gauri Guareri M. 5

On hearing the Gospel of the Lord, I shed all my Dirt :

And I became utterly Fure and walked in Peace.

By good Fortune, | was received in the Seciety of the Saints :
And I fell in Love with the Supreme Lord, J]

Medilating cn the Lord’s Name, ] was Saved :

And I crossed, in safety, the Sea of Fire, //-Pause/
Singing the Lord's Praise, my mind became at Peace,

And the Sins of several births were Washed off,

And I viewed all the nine Treasures within my mind :

Why must I now go to search for (them) without ? £2)
é)

When my Master was in Mercy,

The efforts of the Lord's Servant bore Fruit.

And He Cut my Fetters off and made me His Slave :
Dwell thou, Nanak, on Him, the Treasure of Virtue. [3]
He alone is in the mind : He alone Pervades all places.
He, the Perfect One, Fills all spaces.

Through the Perfect Guru, I cast all my Doubt off :

And, Dwelling on the Lord, Lattained Peace. [4-8-77

Gauri Guareri M. 5

They, who die, are cast off (and forgotten).

But they, who remain behind, are ever on the go',

And involve themselves in the tumult of life,

And gather the riches more and more, each day, [J]
They remember not the time (of death),

And cling to that which passes away. [1-Pause]

The fool clings tenaciously to Hope,

And to Lust, Avarice and Attachment.

Over his head stands the Lord of Law,

But to him the Poison Tastes sweet. [2/

(Says he) : “I will bind (mine enemies) down, and settle with:them all scores,
O, who can enter upon my land ?

lam a wise, and clever, Pundit”

But he, the Unwise one, knows not the One who Created (him). [/3/
The Lord Knows alone Himself His State.

What can a mortal say or dilate upon ?

As is His Will, so are the tasks assigned (to us).

Else, all would seck but their own good, /4/]
Everything belongs to Thee, O Lord, our Creator,
And, there is no end, no limit (to Thy Powers).

Bless me Thou with this, O Lord,

That | forsake not Thy Name. [5-9-738]

Gauri Guareri M. 5

Cag ay gy ag rg Tag Tg.

Try as one may, one is Saved not,

For, the weight of cleverness lies ‘heavy (on one’s head).

(But), if one Serves the Lord with a Pure heart,

One attains Glory in the Lord's Court.

O my mind, seek the Refuge of the Lord’s Name, P. 179
And then even the hot winds would touch not thee, /7—Pause]

As is the ship in the tumultuous sea,

As is the light in abysmal darkness,

As the fire warms one in cold ;

So does the Lord's Name bring Peace to the mind, /{2]

The Thirst of the mind is quenched,

And all one’s Desires are fulfilled,

And one’s mind wavers not, -

If one Dwells on the (Lord’s) Ambrosial Name, by the Guru’s Grace. [3]
He alone Receives the Name, the Cure-all,

On whom is the Lord's Grace.

Nanak : He, in whose heart abides the (Lord's) Name,

All his Pain and Sorrows depart. [4-10-79]

Gauri Guareri M. 5

Gather thou all the riches, but thy mind is sated not.

See thou all the beauty but thou art not satiated,

One is involved with his sons and wife knowing they are his,
But they are all reduced to dust one day. [7/

1) Lit. “have fastened their belts.”

Guru-Granth Salih 99999992299999299999299209999999999920222

MATE MIECECISIOGOGESE OSES IEACOCOCOCACOCLLCESSCHGOSOECOCOCGOBOSS:

Page 21
[ 170 ]

Without Dwelling on the Lord, men cry and wail :
And, accursed is their body and the riches, if they are imbued with the love of Maya. [J—Pause]

If a man is forced to carry (another's) load of money,

And as he opens up his eyes, he sees that all that he saw was-in vain; [2] o—-
As is the watchman over the farm of another,

And the farm remains with the Master, while the watchman passes eway ;

The watchman suffers hard to protect the farm,

But for this, he goes away (in the end) with empty hands. [3]

(So also the man of riches without God) _

He it is who bestows Kingship (upon us) : He, it is who makes us dream.

He it is who Created the Maya, and also the craving for it.

He Himself Destroys : He Himself Resurrects.

Nanak : pray thou, then, in all humility to thy Eternal Lord. {4-1 J-80]

Gauri Guareri M. 5

I looked at the many-faced Maya in many ways :

And wrote cleverly of it with the pen on the paper :

I have seen what it is to be a leader, a king, a chief,

For, not one of these states can satiate one’s mind. [J

O Saints, tell me of a Pleasure,

Which may settle my mind and quench my desire. /{/—Pause]

The horses, fast like wind, and the ride of elephants, .

And the Chandan-scent and the joy, in bed, with a beauteous woman,
And the seeing of the players’ plays and the singing in the ring,

Have brought no Peace to the mind.

The throne at the (royal) court and (the floors) decked with carpets",

And the luscious gardens laden with myriads of fruit,

And the love of hunting and all the other tastes of the kings,

Nothing of these made the mind happy : they proved but an illusion. [3]
In their mercy, the Saints uttered the Truth,

And I attained to utter Peace and Joy.

In their Society, [ Sang the the Praise of the Lord,

Yea, by good Fortune, did I attain to this (State). 4]

Nanak : He, who possesses the Wealth of the Lord's Name,

He, in the Lord's Grace, is Received in the Society of the Holy. {/-Second Pause-Il2-81]

The money reaches the other's hand, while he suffers pain.
As is one exalted in dream to the station of a king,

2

&

é)

J

—

6)

a

f)

é)

B)

dj

E

ff)

Gauri Guareri M. 5

Man thinks, “this body is mine’.

And clings to it over and over again, P. 190
And involves himself with his sons and wife and the household,

And becomes not the Slave of the Lord. [J]

Which Way, O which Way, is one to Utter the Lord’s Praise 7?

What kind the Wisdom, that makes one Swim across (the Sea of Existence)? [J-Pause]

That what is good, he considers as evil,

And looks upon Truth as untruth. - '
He knows not what.is victory, what defeat ?

This is the way of the worshipper of Maya, [2]

That what is Poison the mad one drinks deep,

And the Nectar-Name (of the Lord) seems bitter to him.

He goes not near the Holy Saints,

And wanders through myriads of species, birth after birth, [3]

In the net (of Maya) are all the men caught, like birds,

And in there they revel and taste all (transitory) pleasures.

Nanak : he, on whom is the Lord's Grace,

Is delivered out of the Net a Free Bird. [4-13-82

GOCE Ocoee

ae

1, date (fart) —Tals ; carpets.

9 OLONEOGOHOOOEGECSCOE

Page 21
es Gauri Guareri M, 5

By the Lord’s Grace, do we find the Way,

By the Lord's Grace, do we Dwell upon the (Lord's) Name.
By the Lord’s Grace, are our Fetters cut off:

By Thy Grace, O Lord, do I shed my Ego. /J/

If Thou Willest. 1 Dedicate myself to Thy Service :

© God, of ourselves we can do not a thing. //-Pause}

If Thou Willest, | Sing the Guru's Word :

If Thou Willest, | discourse upon Thy Truth.

If Thow Willest, the Guru is Merciful to me.

© Lord, in Thy Grace, is all Peace. [2/

That what is in Thy Will, is the Righteous Deed,

That which Pleaseth Thee, is the Religion of Truth,

Thou art the Treasure of all Virtues, O Lord ;

Thou art the Master : Thy Servant can only but Pray to Thee, [3]
In the Lord's Love, the body and mind become Pure :

In the Society of the Holy one finds All-peace.

For Ninak this is the highest State of Bliss

That his Mind remains Imbued with Thy Name. /[4-/4-83/

Gauri Guareri M, 5

All other tastes one tastes,

Satiate him not even for an instant.

But, if one tastes the Essence of the Lord,

One enters into the Realm of Wonder. [J /

O my dear tongue, Taste thou the Lord’s Nectar,

For, with this alone is one Satidted. /7-Pause]

O my tongue, Utter thou the Lord's Praise,

And Meditate every instant on thy Lord.

Hear not avght (but the Lord's Name): Go not to another (but thy Lord) :

© tongue, Utter (the Lord’s Praise), night and day,

For, He is thy only Lord, the Supreme, Unknowable.

Thou shalt be happy both here and Hereafter,

And, Uttering the Lord's Praise, invaluable shalt thou become, [3]
All vegetation (then) seems to thee in bloom, and, in flower and fruit :
And, once Imbued with this Taste, thou Jeavest it not.

All other tastes equal not the Taste of the Lord :
- And, (Tasting it), Nanak, the Guru ts ever thy Support. {4~/5-84]

~ Gauri Guareri M. 5

The mind is the temple, fenced! around with the body ;

And within the mind Dwells the Lord, the Infinite. P, 181
Yea, within it Abides the Great Merchant. ;

But, who is it that Trades with Him ? He whom the Lord Trusts. /J]
Rare is the one who Deals in the Jewel of the (Lord's) Name,

And Tastes the fare of Nectar, {/-—Pause]

I would surrender to him my body and mind and Serve him I,

Who shows me the Way that Moves the Heart of the Lord.

I would take to his Feet, shedding my ‘I and thou’,

Yea, he, who would settle with Him the Deal for me, [2)

How is one to attain to the Castle of the Lord ?

Which is the Way that ushers me into His Presence ?

My Lord is the Great Merchant : millions Trade with Him :

But, who is the beneficent one who Unites me with my Lord? /3]
Searching and searching | found my inward Home,

And I was made to See the invaluable Jewel of Truth.

The Lord,in His Mercy, Unites me with Himself,

When, Nanak, the Guru became my pledge of faith*, {4-J6-85/

1. mis (aifti—aie : fence. ass
2. emf Grate : (Sans. rare), faith. sys

Sag ee: — - 5
= a “=

Page 220 www.sikhbookttub.com

at
“)
C)
-)
“)
a
)
a
nal
J
%
a
es
)
C)
“)
a
a
CJ
fe)
Z
a
]
F]
&)
al
EJ
EJ
&)
]
2
i]
3
And, by good Fortune, thou art Received into the Sanctuary of the Holy. [2] :
»
*)
3
4

[172]

Gauri Guareri M. 5

A Saint is) he who remains for ever alike,
nd for ever feels the nearness of the Lord,
And expends only the Lord’s Name,
And is Satiated by the Vision of the Lord, the God. [JJ
And, Imbued with Him, his body and mind are in Bloom,
And secks he the Refuge of the Perfect Guru, //-Pause/
And, his soul leans on the Lord's Lows-Feet,
And, in His Will, Sees he nothing but the One Lord,
And Trades only with the One in one Thing alone,
And knows not another besides the Lord, the Formless. /2/
Who has the feel neither of pleasure nor pain,
And lives Detached, attached only to the Way.
And abides in the midst of all, and yet is removed from all ;
And Dwells only on the Supreme Lord . {3/
Of such a Saint, ineffable is the Praise,
Unknowable is his knowledge, Infinite his limits.
O Supreme Lord, Bless me in Thy Grace,
That | cling to the Feet of such a Saint. /4-/7-86

Gauri Guareri M. 5

Thou wone art my Mate, my Friend ;

Thou alone url my Spouse : I Cherish no one but Thee.
Thou tirt my Honour, Thou art my Embellishment.

Without Thee, how can I live even fora moment? [J]
Thou art my Beloved, Thou art my vital breath.

Thou art my Master : Thou art my Chief. //-Pause]

I live as is Thy Will ;

And do. what is Thy Command.

1 See Thee all over wherever I See,

And my tongue Utters Thy Name, O Fearless Lord! [2]
Thou art my Treasure : Thou art my Store-house ;

Thow art the Support of my Mind : [ am Imbued with Thy Love.
Thow art my Glory : to Thee Lam Attuned.

Thou art my Shelter ; Thou art my Mainstay. /3/

My body and Mind Dwell on no one bul Thee,
When Thy Mystery was Revealed to me through the Guru,
Nanak learnt of Thee, the One Alone, from the True Guru,
And he took to Thy Refuge, QO Lord! /[4-/8-87/

Gauri Guareri M. 5

Maya impinges’ upon us through the expression of pleasure and pain®. P. 182
Maya impinges upon us througlt ‘the thoughts of heaven, hell, the gods,

Maya impinges upon the rich, and the poor alike through desire fon glory,

And through greed, the basic malady. [1]

Maya impinges upon us in many, many ways.

The Saints alone live (away from it), by seeking the Lord’s Refuge. /J-Pause]
Maya impinges upon us through intoxication with Ego.

Maya impinges upon us through attachment to our sons and the wife.

Maya impinges upon us through our possessions —eiephants, horses and raiments :
Maya impinges upon us through intoxication with the beauty’s wine. /2/

Maya impinges upon us as the owners of land, or as the landless ones or as revellers.
Maya i impinges upon us through music's sweet sounds and the bedecked bride,
Maya impinges upon ys through castles and the bridal bed,

And through the all-enveloping Darkness of the Five Demons*, [3]

1. fears (Petreg) : (Sans. ers), Lit, spread through.

2. he, when we, overwhelmed by Maya, are looking oul for reward or are dumb-struck by awe of the God and
the terror of hell.

3. de eve desires,

220 Guru-Granth Suhib

Page 22
Maya impinges upon us when we do (good) deeds in Ego.
aya impinges upon us in the household as also in renunciation.
Maya impinges upon us through our pride of caste, vocation and culture.
Yea, it impinges upon all save those who are Imbued with the Lord's Love, [4]
The Fetters of the Saints the Lord Cuts off,
How can then Maya impinge upon them ?
Says Nanak, “He, who ts Blest with the Dust of the Saint's Feet,
Him the (all-pervasive) Maya touches not". [5-/9-88]

Gauri Guareri M. 5

My eyes are Asleep, for they sin always by viewing (another's beauty) :

My ears are Asleep, for they hear slanderous thoughts.

My tongue is Asleep, being addicted to the taste of the sweet;

And my mind is asleep being dumb-struck by the glamour of Maya. [IJ
Rare is the one who keeps Awake in this Home,

And Receives whole the Essence of his Self. /{1-Pause/

All my Watchmen? are intoxicated, each in his own way :

And knows not one the state of the Home within.

The five Highwaymen® are out to rob us all,

And the whole Town is deserted, deceived by the Deceivers. [2/

Neither father nor mother can keep me safe from them;

Nor can a brother or sister;

They are bribed neither by money nor cheated by cleverness,

In the Society of the Holy alone are they overwhelmed. [3/

O Lord, the Supporter of the earth, Bless me with Thy Mercy,

(That I obtain) the Dust of the Saint's Feet—the Treasure of all treasures.
And my Capital-stock remains whole, in the companionship of the True Guru,
And I am Awakened to the Love of the Supreme Lord, /4]

(But), he alone is Awake on whom is the Lord's Grace,

And then his Capital-stoek, his Self, remains whole. /J-Secand Pause-20-89]

Se a ie i ge ee

Gauri Guareri M. 5

He, in whose Power are the chiefs and the kings,

He, in whose Power is the whole Universe ;

He, who Does whatever is His Will,

And without whom there is no one, [J]

Pray thou to Him, thy True Guru,

That He Fulfils all thy tasks. /{J-Pause]

He, whose Court is of the highest,

He, whose Name is the Mainstay of the Devotees all over,

He, the Perfect Lord, who Pervades all,

He, whose Glory is Revealed to all hearts, [2]

He, by Dwelling on whom one’s Sorrow departs,

He, by Dwelling on whom the Yama touches thee not,

He, by Dwelling on whom the Dry Bones Blossom forth, P. 183
He, by Dwelling on whom even the Stones Swim across, [3

Glory, O Glory, to the Society of the Saints,

Whose life's breath is that Lord’s Name,

Says Nanak, ‘‘The Lord has listened to my prayer,

And, through the Grace of the Saints, f abide ever in the Lord's Name”, [4-21-90]

Gauri Guareri M, 5

Beholding the Presence of the True Guru, the fire within me is quenched.
Meeting with the True Guru, I shed my I-amness.

In the company of the True Guru, the mind wavers not,

And, one Utters the Guru’ $ Nectar-Word. {1

J. Lir, companions.
2. The five desires.

PECCCECECACGOGECSOCCGOCOSEOCECOCECECOER ECR BEECESBECECOEEC

|
Guru-Granth Sahih 99999999299999999999909009999999990902299090900904

Page 22
[ 174 ]

The whole world is true, if one is Imbued with the (Lord's) Truth;
But, one finds Peace on Knowing the Lord through the Guru, /[J-—Pause]
One Meditates on the Lord's Name through the Guru's Grace,

And, through the Guru's Grace, one Sings the Praises of the Lord.
Through the Guru-Saint’s Grace, all our Woes depart.

And, our Fetters are sundered, 2]

Through the Guru-Saint's Grace, are obliterated our Doubts and Lust.
The highest Religion is to Bathe in the Dust of the Holy Feet.

When the Saint is in Mercy, in Mercy also is the Lord :

So, my life abides ever in the Saints. [3]

Dwell thou on thy Lord, the Beneficent, the Merciful,

To attain unto the Society of the Holy.

Me, without Merit, the God has Blessed with His Mercy,

And, joining the Society of the Holy, I Utter His Name. [4-22-91]

Gauri Guareri M. 5

In the Sanctuary of the Saints, I Dwell upon the Lord,

And I Receive the Mantram of the Guru's Immaculate Word.

I shed my Ego and no one is then my enemy. ;

And, night and day, | Worship the Guru's Feet. [J]

Now the evil sense of the Other has left me off,

For, now I hear with my ears nothing but the Lord’s Praise. //-Pause/
He, who is the Treasure of Peace and Poise and Joy,

Has Saved me, the Ignorant one,

And all my Woes, and Doubts and Fears have taken leave,

And, through His Grace, have ceased my coming-and-going. [2]

He alone Hears, Sees and Speaks, ;

And is (also) for ever with us : Dwell thou on Him, O my mind !

By the Saint’s Grace, one is IIlumined,

And one Sees the One, the Treasure of Virtue, Pervading all. [3]
They, who Utter (His Name), are ever Pure : Pure are those who Hear,
And they who Sing the Praise of the Lord.

Nanak : he, on whom is the Lord's Grace,

Fulfilled is he, the Lord's Own, [4-23-92]

Gauri Guareri M. 5

He, who cuts our Fetters off and enables us to Utter the Lord's Name,

And our mind is Attuned to the (Lord's) Truth,

And all our Woes depart and we abide in Bliss :

He, the beneficent one, is my True Guru. /I/ .

He is the giver of Peace who makes us Dwell upon the (Lord's) Name.

And, by His Grace, Unites us with the Lord. /J-Pause

He, on whom is His Mercy, him He Unites with Himself.

And, he, through the Guru, Receives the Treasure of the (Lord's) Name.

One sheds one’s Ego and cease one’s comings and goings :

And, in the Society of the Holy, one realises one’s Lord, the Supreme. [2] ‘
With the Lord’s Servant, the Lord is ever Pleased;

Of him the Lord is the only Support.

He is Attuned to the One alone : the One alone be Loves; ~s
Yea, he, who treasures the Lord’s Name (in the heart). /{3]

He, who is in Love with the Supreme Being,

His Deeds are Pure : Pure is his Way of life.

His Darkness is dispelled by the Perfect Guru.

Says Nanak ; “Our Lord is Ineffable and Infinite.” {4-24-93]

Gauri Guareri M, 5

He, in whose mind Abides the Lord, Swims across (the Sea of Existence) :
He, in whose Lat it is so Writ, Receive. the Lord,

Him the Woes of life and Fear touch not,

In whose heart is the Nectar-Naume of Ged. [1]

Page 22
a
é
F)
a
e)
Dwell thou on God, the Supreme Lord of the Universe : o
This is the Wisdom one Receives from the Perfect Guru, [/-Pause] é)
He, thy Beneficent Lord, alone is the Doer and the Cause, é)
And Sustains all his Creation all over ; ae
He js the Unknowable, Yonder of the yond. Infinite ; *
Dwell thou on Him, O mind, through the Guru's Word. [2/ Sy
He, whose Service brings to thee all the Treasures. Aj
He, whose Worship brings Glory to thee, =
He, whose Service goes not in vain, ; y
Dwell thou on His Praise, for ever and ever. [3 a
© Thou, the Inner-knower Lord, be Merciful to me, J
O Thou, the Unknowable Master, Treasure of Peace, °)
All Thy Creation seeks Thy Refuge, ,
Bless Thou Nanak too with the Glory of Thy Name. [4-25-94] Ei

Gauri Guareri M, 5

)
)
P
. 4 &)
He, in whose Hands is the Key to our life : 2,
Dwell thou on Him, the Support of the supportless. 4
For, keeping Him in thy mind, all our Woes depart.
‘And, through His Name, we shed all our fears. J} 2
Without the Lord, there is no other to fear, 3
And he who forgets Him, where is Peace for him? f/-Pause] 5
He, who has Established many earths and skies,
He, with whose Light our soul is Jllumined,
He, whose Benediction no one can erase,
Dwell thou on Him, the Lord, and so be without fear, [2] 5
Meditate thou, night and day, on the Lord’s Name,
And earn thou thus the Merit of pilgrimage, and of ablution with the holy waters, 3
Seek thou the Refuge of the Lord, the Supreme,
And wash thou off thus myriads of thy Sins. [3]
He is the Perfect King, who leans on no one else,
And, with the Lord's Servants, keeps his Faith. . .
Him, Nanak, the Perfect Guru Protects with His Hands
(And he leans on) no one but the Supreme Lord, the Source of all Power. [4-26-95]
)

Gauri Guareri M. 5

By the Guru’s Grace, one’s mind is Attuned to the (Lord's) Name,

And one is Awakened from the Slumber of ages.

And; one Utters the Lord’s Praise, through the Word.

Such i is the Wisdom of the Guru Revealed to me. [J]

One gathers all Peace by Dwelling on the Lord,

And within oneself and without, one is in Equipoise, /{/-Pause]

The One who Creates all, is Revealed to us ;

And, by His Grace, He Unites us with Himself.

He Holds us by the arm and makes us His Own.

And we Dwell ever on the Gospel of the Lord. /2/

The Mantras, the charms, the panaceas, the pious deeds?.

Are all in the Lord's Name : Dwell thou on it, thy life’s breath, P. 185
And Receive the Truc Wealth through the Love of the Lord :

And cross the impassable (Sca) through thy Union with the Holy, {37

O Saints, abide ye thus in Peace with the Family of Friends,

And carn ye the infinite Riches of the Lord’s Name.

He, in whose Lot it is so Writ, him the Guru Blesses with this : %

And lo, Nanak, no one goes away empty from His Door. (4-—27-96]

1. ysoeg (TaPaTs) ; to perform righteous deeds (like Japa, propitiating the sacred fire, yajna, etc.) to ensure
fulfilment of desire. The word has also been rendered as us (post)--yrggz (conduct), or deeds of expiation or 2
2

atonement, .... 5

ae pe

Guru Granih ‘Pakih 999999999999999999990909999999999992892999990090%

Page 224 
[ 176 }

Gauri Guareri M. 5

In an instant, thy hands become Pure,

And cast off is the web of Maya for thee,

If thy tongue Utters the Praise of the Lord.

© my brother, my friend, thus is Peace attained. [7
Write thou on the paper with thy pen and ink

Nothing other than the Lord's Nectar-Name. /{/-Pawse]
Thus will thy Sins be washed off.

Dwelling cn the Lord, the Yama will Punish thee not,
Nor will the Couriers of Dharmaraja touch thee,

And the infatuation of Maya will trap thee not. /2]

He Saves Himself (and through him) are others Saved,
Who Dwells on the Name of the One, the Absolute Lord.
Practise thou this thyself and instruct others (in it),

And in-gather thou the Lord’s Name in thy heart. [3]
He, in whose Lot is the Writ of this Treasure,

He alone Dwells on the Possessor of all Powers.

He, who Sings the Lord's Praise, day and night,

Unto him Nanak is a Sacrifice. [4-28-97]

Rag Gauri Guareri M. 5 : Chaupadas, Dupadas

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, tle Eternal, the Eulightener.

That what telongs to another, one takes as one's own ;
That what one has to leave, to it one’s mind clings, [J]
How can one find the Lord of the earth,

When that, what is forbidden, is one’s first love. {J-Pause]
The impermanent we consider as eternal.

And _to the eternal we stick not at all. /2/

We walk on the lefi*, the zig-zag way,

And abandon the right, and weave the wrong pattern. [3]
But, the Lord of either end is He,

And he, whom He Unites with Himself, is Free. [4-29-98]

Gauri Guareri M.E5

In the Kali-age, they (ihe man and the woman) meet as was Ordained :

And as was the Will, they enjoy themselves. /J]

But she attains not to her Joved Lord by burning (on his pyre),

And by becoming a Sati through the effect of the Wrevght deeds. [J-Pause]
Sheepishly, she follows the habit of the mind and surrenders herself to fire :

But she attains not the Union of the Lerd, and wanders through many births. [2/
She, who has £elf-contro] and Pious conduct and Submits herself to her beloved’s Will,
Such a woman cermes not to grief at the Yema's hands. [3]

Says Nanak, “She, who lcoks upon the Supreme Ged as her Spouse,
Blessed is such a Seti ard Approved is she at the Lord's Court”. [4-30-99]

Gauri Guareri M. 5

Jam Rich and Fortunate’, for | keep the Lord's True Name (in my Mind),
And Sing the Lord’s Praise epentaneously. / J-Patse/

When I opened the Treasures of my Masters®

How immensely was my Mind pleased at the (spiritual) find? [7]

1 me wag (ard areay=.. "yam : Shiva's (gm) Path (nrg) according{to Tantra, It isiccnsi¢ered the wrong
way by the Vaishnavas as the followers of ram marga hold the use of the wines, meals and indulgence in sex, ete., as sacred.

According to the Shastras, Shiva has his ci-ht side of mem aod the Ieft side of women. The devotee of the left side is
enlled a Fant-morgi and of the right one a Dai.:,

2. aaa (HMS) = 3g-g + fortunate.
3. Lit. father and grand-father.

Page 225
Neither pearls nor rubies is the price

For the brimful Store-house, inexhaustible and beyond measure. [2]
Expend as much as I may with all my company.

(But) it diminishes not and is ever on the increase. [3]

Says Nanak, “He, on whose Forchead is so Writ,

He alone is made to partake of this Treasure.” [4- 31-100}

Gauri M. 5

When | felt the Lord is afar, | was in utter dread ;

But when I Saw Him Pervading all, I shed my fear, [1]

lam a Sacrifice unio my True Guru,

Who abandons me not and Saves me ever. /{J—Pause/

When one forsakes the Lord's Name, one is afflicted by Sorrow,
And, when one Sings the Lord's Praise, one is eternally in Joy. [2]
Say not who's good, who's bad,

And shed thy Ego, and repair to the Lord’s Feet. /3/

Says Nanak, “‘Dwell thou on the Mantram of the Guru :

For thus alone one finds Peace at the True Court”. [4-32-]01}

Gauri M. 5

He, whose friend is the All-pervading Lord,

Is devoid of nothing, [ys]

He, whose Love is the Lord of the earth,

All his Woes and Doubts hasten away. [J-Pause]
He, who Tastes the Essence of the Lord,

Relishes not the taste of the Other. [2]

He, whose writ is accepted in the Lord's Court,
What cares he for another? —/3/ ,

He, to whom belong all things, be thow-of Him,
And so, attain Peace for ever, [4-33-102]

Gauri M. 5

He, who looks alike upon pleasure and pain,

How can he be subject to the stress of Sorrow? [J]

The Lord’s Saint has the Joy of Equipoise,

For, he submits ever to the Will of the Lord, his King. /J—Pause]
He, in whose mind Dwells the Care-free Lord,

How can he be ridden with care? [2]

He, whose mind is rid of the Doubt,

How can he fear the rod of the Yama? [3]

He, in whose heart is the Guru-given Name,

He attains, Nanak, to all the nine Treasures. {4-34-103]

Gauri M. 5

In the mind Dwells the unknowable (Lord) ;

But rare is the one who knows it, by the Guru’s Grace. [J]

And Revealed to him are the Nectar-springs of the Lord’s Wisdom ;

But, Tastes them he who Receives them. //-Pause]

Wonderful is the (mind's) seat where Rings the Unstruck Music,

Which enchants even Gopal, the Supporter of the earth. /2/

Innumerable therein are the abodes of Peace,

Wherein abide the Saints, the Friends of the Supreme. [3/

Where there is Joy immeasurable and no Sorrow :

That abode has Nanak been Blest with, by the Guru’s Grace. /4-35-J04/

Gauri M. 5

. Which is Thy form that I may Worship ?
Which is the way of Yoga through which I may dacipline my body ? [J]

Page 226
fee a

Se

Page 227

g OESSEoCeocoosesoeeeseees

[ 178 ]

Which of Thy Merits. O Lord, shall I Sing of 7 P. 187
And which are the words wherewith Thou art Pleased? {J-Pause]

Which way am I to Worship Thee ?

Which way shall | be Ferried across the Sea of Existence ? [2]

Which is the austerity that makes me Austere ?

Which is the Name that washes clean my dirt of Ego? /3/

The Merits of Virtue, Worship, Wisdom, Meditation, and all the (spiritual) Toil, are his

On whom is the Lord’s Grace ; him meets the Guru, the True, the Beneficent One. [4]

He alone Receives Merit : to him alone is Revealed the Lord,

Whom the Giver of Peace, my God, Approves. {/-Second Pause—36-105]

Gauri M. 5

The body, of which we are proud, is not ours,

Nor dominions, nor Jand, nor money that we call our own, = /J/

If these are not ours, why then cling to them ?

The Lord's Name alone is ours, which we Receive through the Guru. /J-Pause]

Nor are sons nor wife nor brothers our own,

Nor are father, mother, friends and other objects of love, [2/

Nor are gold, silver and riches ours, .

Nor are beauteous horses and elephants of any avail to us, [3]

Nanak : he, whom the Guru Blesses with His Grace,

To him everything belongs, for he belongs to the Lord, the King of kings. /4-37-106]

Gauri M. 5

The Guru’s Feet are on my forehead,

Whereby have departed all my Woes. [J/

I am a Sacrifice unto the True Guru,

Through whom I Fxamined myself and revelled in cesiasy. {/—Pause]
I rub the Dust of the Guru's Eeet on my face,

And thereby I shed my Egocentricity, 2)

And T love sweetly the Guru's Word,

‘And see thereby the Supreme Lord. 3) ;

The Guru is the Giver of Peace : the Guru is God, the Creator.
And, to Nanak, the Guru is the vital breath of his life, {4-38-J07]

Gauri M, 5

O my mind, seek the Refuge of the Lord,

Who is devoid of nothing. [J]

Make thy beloved like the Lord, O my mind, my friend,

And keep thou in thy concious Self the Life of thy life. /J-Pause]
O my mind, Serve thou Him alone, :

Who is the Person Primordial and the God Infinite.
On Him thou lean, O mind, and rest thy hope,
Who is thy Support, since the beginning of Time. {3]

He, whose Love gives nothing but Gladness,

Of Him, Nanak, thou Sing, by repairing to the Guru, /4~-39-J08]

f2]

Gauri M, 3

All that my Friend Does, leads to Joy :

All that my Friend Does, I submit thereto. {J

My Mind rests its Hope on the One alone:

He alone is my Friend who Does what He Wills. {i-Pause]

Care-free is my Friend, ;

And He came to be my Love, through the Guru's Grace. [2]

My Friend is the Inner-knower of all :

The All-powerful Self, the Supreme Lord, the Master, /3/ P. 188
I am Thy Slave and Thou my Master, O God,

And, all Glory and Honour are Thy-given. 4-40-1099]

3233233232900 Guru-Granth Sahi
Gauri M. 5

He, whose Support art Thou, O All-powerful Lord,

Him no black mark (of Evil) can stain. [J]

O Thou, the Lord of Maya, he, who rests his Hope on Thee,
Him the Illusion of the world cheats not, [J-Pause]

He, in whose mind Abidest Thou, O Lord,

He is haunted not by Doubt or Duality. /2/

He, whose Consolation art Thou,

Near him cometh not Pain, nor Woe, [3]

Says Nanak : “J have found the Guru,

Who Revealed to me the Perfect Lord Supreme”. [4-4/-J10]

Gauri M. 5

The fortunate one has got the priceless gift of the human body :
But if he Dwells not on the (Lord’s) Name, he destroys his Soul.
They, who forsake the (Lord’s) Name, live only to die.

For, devoid of the Lord's Name, what use is life’? /J-Pause/
They eat and drink and revel in a myriad ways, ;

(But) of what avail are the embellishments of the dead ? [2]

He, who hears not the Praise of the Supreme Bliss,

Is worse than the quadrupeds, the birds, nay, even the worms. [3]
Says Nanak : “The Guru has Blest me with his Mantram,

And the Lord's Name alone Abides within my heart.” {4-42-77 )

Gaori M. 5

Whose is the father, whese is the mother ?

In name only are all these kinsmen, all relations are vain. [IJ

Why then does one lose one’s head 7"

One comes by the Lord's Will when one is so Destined. [/-Pause]

Then, the dust returns to dust, light to the Lord’s Light :

Breath mingles with the breath of air : what, then, is there to grieve for? [2]
One wails : “He was mine, O mine,”

Knowing not that the Soul dieth not. [3]

Says Nanak : “When the Guru opened unto me the Door (of Wisdom),

1 was delivered, and departed from me the state of Doubt.” {4-43-112]

Gauri M. 5

They, that seem big and affluent,

Are afflicted by the disease of care. [JJ

No one, becomes great by being rich,

For, he alone is great whose mind is centred on Goad, = /{7-Pawse]

The Jard-owner fights over his lend each day.

And then he has to abandon it : but his craving is stilled not. {2/

Says Nanak : “I have knewn this to be the Essence of Wisdom,

That without Contemplating the Lord, one attains net Deliverance.” [3-44-1137

Gauri M. 5

Perfect is the Way, Perfect the Ablution :

Perfect are al] the things if the Lord’s Name be in the heart. [J]

If the Perfect One Saves cur Honour, it stays,

And the Lord’s Servant secks the Reluge of the Supreme. [J-Pause]
Perfect is the Happiness, Perfect the Contentment,

Perfect is the Austerity : Perfect the Raj-Yoga®, [2]

Treading on the Lord’s Way, Pure are the Sinners made ;

They attain Perfect Glory and Perfect is their humanity: [3/

1. fe 8 Wal fae fenes eH (fe AF net fear fires TH) : Lit, They who forget their Lord, are remembered
nol (wal, we Sal Ate) after death (Hie wea),

: 2. ay We (ay wy): Lit. “Royal Yoga’. “The science of conquering the internal nature for the purpose of
the Divinity within". (Vivekanand, Raj Yoga).

Page 228 
And, they abide cver in the Presence of the Creator-Lord.
Says Nanak : “Such is my Guru, Perfect and True’, /4-45-/ 14]

Gauri M. 5

#)
2
J]
The Dust of the Saint's Feet destroys myriads of Sins. P. 189
By the Saint's Grace, one gets Release from birth and death, /J/
The Vision of the Saint is a Perfect Bath :
By the Saint's Grace, we Meditate on the (Lord's) Name, [/-Pause/
In the Society of the Saints, one sheds one’s Ego.
And all over and within all, one Sees the One, the Absolute, alone. [2]
By the Saint's Grace, the five (desires) are overwhelmed,
And one gathers the Nectar-Name in one's heart. [3]
Nanak : he, whose Lot is Perfect,
He alone takes to the Saint's Feet. [4-46-1J5/
é

Gauri M. 5

Meditating on the Lord's Merits, one’s Lotus flowers,

By Dwelling on the Lord, all one’s fears depart. fi ]

Perfect is that intellect which makes one Sing the "s Praise ;

And, Fortunate is he alone who meets with the Saints. [J—Pause]

In the Assembly of the Saints, one attains to the Treasure of the (Lord's) Name.
In the Assembly of the Saints, all ones tasks are Fulfilled,

Meditating on the Lord, one’s life is Approved.

And, by the Guru’s Grace, one Utters only the (Lord's) Name. [3]

Nanak : he, the Lord’s Own, is Approved,

In whose heart Dwells the Lord, the Supreme. /4-47-/16]

Gauri M. 5

He, whose mind is Imbued with the One alone,

Feels not jealous of another. [J/

(For), without Govind, he sees not another,

Yea, He the One, the Creator and the Cause. /J-Pause/

He, who utters His Name with the tongue and Dwells upon it in the Mind,
He wavers not here or Hereafter. oF

He, who has treasured the Lord's Name, is truly Rich.

And of him the Guru stands as the Pledge. [3]

Him Meets the Kingly Purusha, the Life of all life ;

And he, Nanak, attains to the highest State (of Bliss) [4-48-17]

Gauri M. 5

The Lord’s Name is the life-breath of the Devotee of the Lord.

The Lord’s Name is all his riches : with the Name is all his Trade. [J]
Through the Glory of the Name, Glorious one becomes :

But, he alone attains to it on whom is the Lord’s Grace. /J-Pause]
The Lord's Name is the Seeker’s Abode of Peace .

Imbued with the Name, the Secker is Approved (by the Lord). [2/
The Lord’s Name is the Devotee's Support,

And, with every breath, he inbreathes only the (Lord's) Name. {3}
Nanak : he, whose Destiny is Perfect,

To the Lord’s Name alone is his Mind Attuned, [4-49-//8]

eC egy Deg Thy Tag hy ad Ty Tas

COGS

Ganori M. 5

By the Saint’s Grace, I dwelt on the (Lord's) Name,

And, ever since, has my wandering mind been held. [JJ

l rested my mind in Peace by Chanting His Praise,

And, all my Toil ceased and the Demon (of Evil within me) was Slain. [J-Pause]
] Dwell on the Lotus-Feet of the Supreme Lord :

And, Meditating on Him, my cares depart. /2/

a
e)
)
#)
&)
*)
©
©
a
3
5
g
e
@
4
Q
i)
3
**F

" Page 22
J, the Supportless, have abandoned all else and cage the Lord's Refuge,
And, imperceptibly, | attain to the highest State of Peace, [3]

And all my Woes and Doubts and Fears have ceased,

And the Creator, O Nanak, has my Mind Received, [4-50-I19]

Gauri M. 5

With the hands I Serve ; with the tongue I Praise. . P. 190
And with the feet I walk upon the Way of the Lord. [J]

Blessed is the time when [ Dwell upon God.

And Meditating on the (Lord's) Name, I Cross the (Sea of) Fear. /J-Pause/

With the eyes, see thou the sight of the Saints,

And inscribe thou the Immortal Lord in thy mind. [2)

And repair thou to the Saints to Hear the Lord’s Praise,

That thy fear of birth and death may cease.

Cherish thou the Lotus-Feet in thy heart,

And Save, thus, Nanak, thy precious life, [4-37-720]

Gauri M. 5

He, on whom is the Lord's Grace

Utters, with his tongue, the Lord’s'Praise. {i}

Forgetting Him, one suffers in Doubt ;

(But Meditating on Him, one’s Fear ‘and Doubt depart, /{1~Pause]

He, who Hears and Sings the Praises of the Lord,

Him Pain and Sorrow touch not. [2]

The Lord’s Slave looks Beauteous when he Serves,

And him the fire of Maya burns not, .

Keep thou the Lord's Name, the Beneficent, in thy body and mouth and Mind,
And, Nanak, forsake thy toil for all else. /4-52-J21/

Gauri M. 5

Shed thou thy cleverness,

And seek the Refuge of the Perfect Guru, [7]

That thy Woes depart, and in Peace thou Singest the Lord's Praise,

And, Meeting the Perfect Guru, thou art Attuned to the Lord, [J~Pause]
The Guru gave me the Mantram of the Lord's Name,

And all my Woes and Cares have ceased, /2]

And I am in Bliss on meeting the Guru-in-Grace,

And He, in his Mercy has cut the Fetters of the Yam off my feet. [3]
Says Nanak, “Since I Received the Perfect Guru

Maya has impinged not upon me”, [4-53-1227

Gauri M. 5

Himself, the Perfect Guru has Saved me,

While the Egocentrics writhe in Pain, [7] _

© my mind, my friend, Dwell thou on the Guru, and on him alone,
That thy Face looks Beauteous at the Lord's Court. [J-Pause]
Enshrine thou the Guru's Feet in thy heart,

That thy Enemies, thy Sorrows, are slain, [2]

And the Guru's Word keeps thee company,

And all thy brother-creatures are compassionate to thee. [3]
When the. Perfect Guru was in utter Grace,

Then, says Nanak, Fulfilled me he. /4-54-123]

Gauri M. 5

Animal like, one eats all kinds of eats,

And with the rope of Attachment is one bound down like a thief. J)
Bereft of the Society of the Saints is one’s body a co

And one comes and goes and is destroyed by Pain. Fi-Pause]

Guru-Grenth Sahib 090909022999999909992222990000900990222290090090%

MPBGECCCECHSOSSSCSESECOSOSCESEBSOSECESEGEGEE EGE OGOSCCCCOCOSCCEOGCAGRROCER IAEA BIO etH ‘

Page 23
One decks oneself with all kinds of wears,

But one !coks only like a scare-crow m tne tarm. [2]

All other bodies are of one use or another,

Save the man’s who Dwells rot on the Lord's Name. /{3/

Says Nanak ; ‘He, on whom the Lord is in Grace.

Mcets with the Saints, and Dwells on the Lord's Name", [4-55-/24)

Gauri M. 5

The Guru's Word stilled all my Desires and Sorrow,

And my coming and going ceased : all Happiness was mine. [1]

My Fear was dispelled and ] Dwelt on the Lord, the Fearless,

And in the Assembly of the Saints, I Sang the Lord's Praise. /J-Pawse/
And I Enshrined in my heart the Lotus-Feet (of the Lord),

And, through the Guru's Grace, Crossed the Sea of Fire. [2]

I was being Drowned : Rescued me the Guru's Hand,

And my Separation of ages was brought to anend, [3]

Says Nanak : “Sacrifice am I unto the Guru,

‘On meeting whom I was Emancipated”. [4-56-J25/

Gauri M. 5

Seek thou the Refuge of the Holy :

And make an offering to them of thy mind and body. {J/

Drink thou, O brother, the Lord's Nectar-Name,

And Meditating on it, quench thy Fire’s fame. {J-Pause]

Shed thy Ego and end the Round of births and deaths,

Anc salute thou the Feet of the Lord's Slaves. [2]

In-gafher thou the Lord with every breath,

And gather thou only the Riches that go along with thee. /3/

He alone Receives the Lord in whose Lot it is so Writ.

Prays Nanak ; “Repair thou, then, to thy Lord's Feet’. {4-57-J26]

Gauri M. 5

In a moment, the Lord makes the Dry Wood blossom forth,

And watering it with His Nectar-Presence, brings it back to Life. [1]
The Perfect Guru-God rids thee of thy Woes forsure,

And His Servant he Blesses with His Service. {/-Pause]

All thy Care departs, Fulfilled is thy Mind's Hope ;

When the Trve Guru, the Treasure of Virtue, is Merciful to Thee. (27
Thy Woes depart and thou art filled with Bliss

Without a moment's delay, at the Guru’s Command. /3/

Thy Hope is Fulfilled and thou meetest the Perfect Guru :

And thus, Nanak, thou dost fruition and flower, {4-58=/27]

Gauri M, 5

Thy Fire is extinguished and the Lord Blesses thee with Peace :

This is the Benediction of the Lord that Peace comes unto thee, [J]
By the Lord’s Grace, one is United with Him,

After the Separation of ages. [J-Pause/]

Meditating on the Lord's Name,

The Source of all Disease is destroyed. {2/7

And the Lord’s Word comes spontaneously to him:

And, night and day, he keeps the Lord in his Mind. 3]

For, neither Pain nor Sorrow, nor the Yama comes near unto him,
Who Dwells on the Lord and Sings His Praise, {4-59-/28]

Gauri M. 5

Blessed is the day, Blessed the auspicious time, ;
When the Lord Supreme, thy Detached Master, is Met. {J}

P. 191
[ 183 ]

Sacrifice am I unto the moment,

When my Mind rests on the Lord's Name. [/-Pause]

Blessed is the auspicious moment, Blessed the hour,

When the tongue Utters (the Name) of the Destroyer of Sin. {27

Blessed is the forehead that bows down to the Saint :

Blessed the feet that tread on the Lord’s foray [3]

Says Nanak : “Blessed, O Blessed, is my Lo P P, 192
That urges me to take to the Saints’ Feet", "1 4-60-1297}

Gauri M. 5

Keep thou the Guru's Word in thy Mind,

And Dwell on the Lord’s Name that thy Care departs. [J/
Serve thou the Supreme Lord, for, there is not another,
For, Saves and Destroys but He the One alone.  J-Pause/
Cherish thou the Guru's Feet in thy heart,

And, Meditating on Him, Cross thou the Sea of Fire. [2]
Dwell thou on the Presence of the Guru,

That thou art Honoured both here and Hereafter. [3]

He, who abandons all, and seeks the Guru's Refuge, .
His Doubts depart and, Nanak, he is Blest with Bliss. [4-6f-130] \

Gauri M. 5

He, by Dwelling on whom cease all our Woes,

And the Jewel of the Lord’s Name is Enshtined inthe Mind, [JJ

Meditate thou, O my mind, on the Word of that Govind,

For the Saints have uttered it, with the one Lord on their tongue. . [/-Patse]
Without the One, there-is not anotner,

And, by His Grace, "He Brings Peace to thee for ever, [2]

Befriend only the Lord, the

And inscribe in thy mind the Word of the Lord alone, :/3/

The Lord Pervades all, all over,

And, Nanak Sings the Praise of Him, the Inner-knower. [¢-62-131]

Gauri M. 5

With fear is filled the whole world :

And, he alone fears not whose Mainstay is the Lord’s Name. [J/
He has no dread who seeks Thy Refuge, O Lord,

For, Thou Doest what Thou Willest, {/-Pause/

He, who is affected by pain and pleasure, comes and goes,

But he, who seeks Thy Pleasure, remains ever in Bliss. /2/

The Sea of Fire rages : Maya permeates our beings :

And, they alone are at Peace, who attain to the True Guru, [3]
Them the Lord, the Shield of all, shields ;

For, a mere creature can do not a thing of his own. [4-63-132]

Gauri M, 5

By the Lord’s Grace, we Meditate on the Lord's Name,
By the Lord's Grace, we Attain to the Lord's Court. [JJ
O Thou, the Transcendent Lord, the secondless,
By Thy Grace, We are ever at Peace. /T-Pause}
When Thou Comest in the Mind, our Sorrows depart :
By Thy Grace depart all our Fears and Doubts. /2/
© Thou, the Transcendent Master Infinite,
© Thou, the Inner-Knower of all hearts! [3]
_ Nanak prays to thee, ‘O Thou, the Guru True,
Bless him, pray, with the Treasure of Truth”, [4-64-J33]

Gauri M, 5

As is the chaff empty without the grain,
So is the mouth empty without the Lord’s Name, [J]

GurvGranth Sahih 99999992999999999999990999999999990922822999900 99%

FABOVOCCECOSGOGOSOOS GOSCOSERISACECHCOACE EPI SLA OSHSESCCCOOSEGOGSSEE

Page 232 © 
[ 184 ]

O life, Dwell ever on the Lord’s Name.

For, accursed 35 the Jife witkcut it ard is claimed by‘Death, { /-Pause]

Without the Lord’s Neme, thy Fate shines not forth :

Without the Groem, who is one to love? /2/

He, who is devoid of the Lord’s Name and takes to another,

How can he ke ever Fulfilled ? {37

Bless Thou me, O Lord, in Thy Mercy, .

That Nanak Meditaies on Thy Name, cay and night! [4-65~734/ P. 193

Gauri M. 5

‘Thou art All-powerful, my Master.

Everything flcws frcm Thee ; Theu art the Inner-knower. [J]

The Perfect, Transcendent Lord, is the Servant's Refuge ;

Thus are myriads Saved and Emancipated. //-Pause

All the creatures that ther. re, are Thine,

And Thy Grace it istha’ --gs them Peace. /2/

All that happens isin T > ~ Ul,

And he, that knows Ths Merges ir Thy Truth, [3/

Be Theu in Mercy, O30. sd Bless Nanak

That he Dwells cn Thy 3. 2, the Treasure (of Gocd). [4-66-J35

Gauri M. 5

By gocd Fortune, cne has th. Vision of the one
Whose Soul is Attuned to the Lord’s Name. [J]
He, in whose Mind is Ensbrined the Lord,
' Sees not Sorrow even in dream, {/j-Pause]
The Servant’s Mind treasures the Treasure of all (Good),
And in his Company ali our Sins and Sorrows are washed away. [2]
The Praise cf the Lord’s Servant is ineffable,
For hia being is filled with the Transcendent Lord. /3]
In Thy Mercy, my God, bearken to Nanak’s Prayer,
And Bless him with the Dust of Thy Saints’ Feet. /4-67-136]

Gaori' M5
Dwelling on the Lord, the Demen (within thee) departs, .
And into thy Mind enters Eternal Bliss. [77

Meditate, O my mind, on tte One Name of God,

Which alone is of comfcrt ta thy Soul. = 1-Pause]

And, night and day, Dwell on the Infinite Praise (of the Lord),
‘Through the Immaculate Mantram of the Perfect Guru, [2]
Give up all other efforts, and rest thy Hope on the Onc,

To Taste the Nectar-Relish of the Great Essence. [3]

He alone, Nanak, Swime across the impassable Sea,

For whem the Lord, the Compassionate, is in Grace. [4-68—J37]

Gauri M, 5

Dwell, in thy heart, on the Lotus-Feet of the Lord,

And meet thou the Perfect Guu ; thus is one Emancipated. /J]

© brother, Uiter the Praise of Govind,

And, Meeting with the Saints, ‘Jwell on the Lord's Name. [/—Pawuse/

One's precious body is Approved,

When one Receives from the True Guru the Pass-word of the Lord’s Name. [2/
Meditating on the Lord, one Mounts to the Perfect State (of Bliss)

And, in the Society of the Holy, his Doubis are cast off. [3]

And then one finds Him wherever one Sees.

So Nanak, the Lord’s Slave, seeks His Refuge. [4-69-38]

Page 23
Gauri M, 5

I am a Sacrifice unto the Vision of the Guru:

I live ever by Dwelling on his Word. [J]

O, the Transcendent Thou, the Perfect One, the Guru-God,

Be in Thy Mercy that I take to Thy Service. [/-Pause]

And Enshrine Thy Feet in my heart,

And surrender my body, mind and riches to the Life of my life. [2]

Thus is Blest and Approved my life,

And I See"the Guru, the Transcendent Lord, so near. [3]

By good Fortune is one Blest with the Dust of the Saint's Feet,

And, Nanak, Meeting with the Guru, we are Attuned to the Lord. [4-70-/39] « P. 194

Gauri M. §

One does evil deeds and pretends to be Pure,

In the Lord's Court he ts bound down like a thief for sure. [27

He, who Dwells on the Lord, to him belongs He,

Who Pervades the land and inter-space and the sea. /J—-Pause]

Withio him is the poison, and from the mouth out-pours I nectar he,

He is bound down at the Yarna’s Abode and Punished, and he Grieves. /2/
Screened off from the world, one commits Sin,
But it is known the world over in an instant. (3/

He, who's True from within and Imbued with the Lord's Name,

On him, Nanak, doth the Mercy of the Lord of our Destiny rain, {4-7/-/40]

Let not the Love of God leave me ever,
By the Guru's Grace, that makes me See and Know. [1]

He, whose mind is Imbued with the Lord’s Love is True,

For, dyed in flaming Colours is the Perfect Architect of our Destiny. {I-Pause]
He, who Sings the Lord’s Praise in the Society of the Holy, :

His Colour is fast and it fades not. [2]
Without Meditating on the Lord, one gathers not Peace,
For, the other loves are false and illusory, like Maya. /3]
He, whom the Guru Blesses, is Saved,

()

e)

i]

Ganori M. 5 3
&)

|

8

&

e)

j)

&)

#)

é)

é)

And to him the Guru is ever compassionate. [4-72-41] Fs
&)

Gauri M. 5

Meditating on the Master, one sheds one’s Sins,

And one abides in Bliss and Joy and Peace. [J]

The Lord's Servants rest their Hopes on the Lord,

And Meditating on His Name, their Doubts depart. /{J—Pause/
In the Assembly of the Holy, there's neither Doubt nor Fear,
And, there, we dwell ever on the Praise of the Lord. /2/]

In His Mercy, the Lord Cuts our Fetters off,

And of His Lotus-Feet, He Gives us the Refuge. [3]

Says Nanak : “In the mind comes then the Faith, forsure,

And the Lord’s Servant Drinks the Essence Pure". [4-73-42]

SORES EHR

Gauri M. 5

‘He, whose mind rests on the Lord's Feet,

His Pain and Sorrow and Doubt cease to be. [I]

‘He, whom the Lord Blesses, is a Perfect Hero,

And, hé alone Deals perfectly in the Wealth of the Lord's Name. /J-Pause]
He, on whom is the Master's Grace,

He alone takes to the Feet of the Guru, /2]

Guru-Gramth Bakib 999999990999999999999099999999999992800229

SMOG GoCCCeSGSS5G5

ag

Page 23
He enjoys the Joy, of Equipoise and Peace,

And lives he Meditating on the Supreme Bliss. {3

In the Assembly of the Holy, one carns the Treasure of the Lord's Name,
And so, Nanak, the Lord ends one’s Pain. [¢-74-J43)

Gauri M, 5

Meditating on the Lord, all our Pains are stilled ;

And the Lotus-Feet of the Lord are Enshrined in the Mind. /J]
Utter the Lord's Name a myriad times,

And Drink the Nectar of the Lord, my dear (tongue)! /J-Pause/
This wise, one attains Gladness, Equipoise, and utter Peace,

If one lives by Dwelling on the Supreme Bliss. {2

One sheds one’s Lust, Wrath, Avarice and Ego,

And, in the Society of the Holy, one's sins and vices go. [3]

O Thou, the Beneficent Lord of the meek, have Thy Mercy,

And Bless Nanak with the Dust of Thy Saints’ Feet. {4-75-/44]

Gauri M. 5

He, who Endows us with food and raiment, P. 195
Why mayn't I but Cherish that Lord? [JJ

The Bride, who forsakes her Spouse and takes to another,

Casts away the Jewel for the trite, J-Pause]

He, who abandons his Master and is attached to Vice,

Greets but His slave (the Maya): I[s that wise? /2]

One relishes the nectar-foods and drinks,

But remembers not the wretch Him who Endows him with these, [3]

Says Nanak: “I have betrayed Thy salt,

O, the Inner-knower, Forgive me Thou, oO Lord 1" [4-76-1435]

Gauri M. 5

I Cherish the Lord's Feet in my Mind,

And thus do T Bathe in the Holy Waters. {1}

Dwell ever on the Lord, O brother :

Thus will thy Dirt of ages be cleansed. /J-Pause]

He, who Enshrines the Gospel of the Lord in the heart,
Receives the reward of his heart's Desire. {2/

His birth and death and life are Approved,

Yea, he in whose heart Dwells the Lord. [3]

Nanak ; they the ones are Perfect and Approved,

Who are Blest with the Dust of the Saint's Feet. [4-77-46]

Gauri M. 5

One, who eats and wears and denies the Lord,

Him the Couriers of Death keep in their eye. [i]

On Him, who gave him body and life, he turns his back,

And thus he wanders through myriads of births. //-Pause/

Such are the ways of the worshipper of Maya, .

That whatever he does, he does the wrong way. /2]

He, who has Blest him with the body, mind, life and Soul :

Forsakes he Him, the Lord of all. /3/

His Sins are countless : one can count them not ;

O Nanak, he Swims across (only) if our Lord, the Sea of Mercy, be in Grace. [4]
O, the Transcendent Lord, | seek Thy Refuge.

Break Thou my shackles that I Swim across, Ferried by Thy Name. /[J/-Second Pause—78=I47]

Gauri M. 5

He, who befriends the Lord only to satiate his wants,
Even him the Lord Fuifils, and Emancipates. [1]

DI9D2090900022322329029292329339722339222922590 Guru-Granth Sahib
i

Page 23
Befriend then Him ye all, O men,

Without whom there is not another. —[/-Pause]

He, whose heart Enshrines the Lord for his own self’s sake,

Even his Pain and Sorrows are cast off. [2]

He, whose tongue is used to uttering the Lord’s Name,

All his Desires are fulfilled. /3/

Nanak is a Sacrifice a myriad times unto the Lord,

Whose Sight is fruitful, and, who is the Support of the world = /{4-79-148]

Gauri M,. 5

Myriads of Sorrows are stilled in an instant,

Of him who hears the Lord's Gospel from the Saints, [J]

And he Drinks the Lord's Essence, ambrosial is whose Tasie ;

And, Dwelling on the Lord's Feet, his Hunger and Thirst depart, /J—Pause/

He is utterly Emancipated and attains the Treasure of Poise and Peace, P, 196
In whose heart Dwells the Lord of the Universe. [2]

All formulas and charms and cures and cants are as dust,

Assemble thou Him, the Creator, in thy heart. [3/

Cast off all thy Doubts, and Dwell on the Supreme Lord,

For, says Nanak, “Eternal is this Religion (of God)". [4-80-]49}

Gauri M. 5

alt

é)

"oh

e)

a

)

es

ey

#

ft

-

t)

-)

CJ

The Lord, in His Mercy, Unites us with the Guru, 3

By Whose Power we suffer no Sorrow. [J/ ®)

If one Dwells on the Lord, one Crosses the Sea of Fear, 3

And in the Refuge of the One on High, off-torn is the Writ of the Yama. [1-Pause] a

The True Guru Blest me with the Mfantram of the Lord’s Name, 5)

And leaning on it, all my desires were Fulfilled. {2} &)

Meditation, austerity, self-control and perfect Glory ; e)
Are contained in the Mercy of the Guru, yea, in the Support of the Lord. [3]
Says Nanak : “Through the Guru, I shed my Pride and Attachment and Doubt,

And I Saw Him, the All-pervasive Lord.” {4-8/-/50]

3

3

%)

3}

3

aj

®}

Gauri M. 5

The blind one is better than the vicious',

For, the blind one remembers the Lord (at least) in sorrow. [1]

Of Thy Servant, Thou, O Lord, art the Glory,

For the lure of Maya leads one down to Hell. /J-Pause]

When one is in Pain, one utters the Lord’s Name,

But he, who is vicious—where is Peace for him? (2)

He, who Loves the Lotus-Feet (of the Lord),

Knows not another kind of Joy. /3/

Dwell thou ever on the Master, thy Over-Lord,

And Meet thou Him thus, the Inner-knower of thy heart, [4-82-J51]

Gauri M. 5

Night and day, we keep company with the Highwaymen,

And it is the Lord’s Mercy that Saves us (from them). [J]

Enjoy thou the Essence of the Lord,

He the Perfect One, the Master of all arts. /{J—Pause/

The Sea of the world is ‘on fire’ .

But the Lord, in a moment, Ferries us across. [2]

Myriads are our Bonds : we can break them not; .

(But), Meditating on the Lord's Name, we gather the Fruit of Freedom. 3]

1. fat a 3 iver aval (fact ow A get wrér): Lit, Than one who is occupied with ,j— from gra) vice
(fa), a blind man (»iget) has more weight (gret). —_

Page 23
PSCSOCCOCCEOGSCCCOECEAECECOCCOC

Page 237

{ 188 }

Not cleverness can win us a place (in the Lord's Court):
But, when the Lord is in Mercy, Nanak Sings His Praise. [4-83-/52]

Gauri M, 5

(If) the Lord's Name holds one’s mind,

Then, wander through the world as one,may, one is Fulfilled. [J]
By good Fortune, we Sing the Lord's Praise,

‘O Lord, as Thou Blessest us, so do we attain. [{i-Pause]

Enshrine the Lord's Feet in thy heart, O man,

For, thus one Crosses the Sea of Fear. [2]

Keep thou the Society of the Saints,

And thou art for ever Sayed and art never in Sorrow, [3
Through loving Adoration, Meditate thou on the Treasure of virtue,
And thus attain thou Glory at the Lord's Court, {4-84-753/

Gauri M. 5

My Friend, the Lord, Pervades all waters, all earth, all space,

And my Doubt is dispelled and I Sing His Praise. /1/

In sleep as in the waking state, the Lord is our Watchman, O dear,

And Dwelling on Him, we shed the Yarna's Fear. //-Pause]

Enshrine the Lord’s Lotus-Feet in thy heart's abode, P, 197
And shed thus all thy Sorrow’s load: /2] .

All my hope, my pride, my power and riches is the One :

Yea, my Mind leans on the True King alone. /3/

Nanak is the poorest, the most helpless, of the Lord’s Servants,

But over him is the Shelter of the Lord's Hands, /4-85-]54]

Georl M. 5

Cleanse thyself with a Bath in the Lord's Name,

For, great is its Fruit : more than of charity practised on myriads of eclipses, /J-Pause]
If the Lord’s Feet are Enshrined in thy heart,

The Sins of all thy past births depart. [J]

In the Assembly of the Holy, one reaps the Fruit of the Lord's Praise,

And then one sees not ever the Fama's Path. [2]

Lean in thy thought, word and deed on Govind,

That thou art Delivered of the poisonous (meshes) of the world. /3/

The Lord has made me His Own, by His Grace,

And Nanak now Dwells ever on the Lord’s Name. /4-86-/55]

Gauri M. 5

Seek thou the Refuge of the One who has Realised the Lord,

And Cling to the Lerd’s Feet : thus are the body and mind at Peace. [J]

If one Enshrines not the Fearless Lord in the mind,

One trembles ever with fear and wastes away his many, many lives. {J-Pause]
He, in whose heart Dwells the Lord’s Neme,

All his Desires are Fulfilled : and, all his works. /2/

He, in whose power is our birth, age and death,

Meditate on Him with thy cach feed, cach breath. 3]

He, the One, is thy only Friend, yea, He the Lord:

So, let His Name alone be thy Support. /4-87—J56]

Gauri M. 5

Outside they Enshrine the Lord in their hearts,

And coming Home, they bring Him in, they, the Lord’s Saints. {f]

The Lord's Saints keep ever the Society of the Lord’s Nam

And, their body and Mind are Imbued with the Love of the Lord, [J-Peuse]
They, by the Guru's Grace, Swim the (world's) Ocean across,

And shed they their Sins of all their births. /2/

FDO Guru- -Granth Salih
To Evxshrine the Lord’s Name in their minds is their Glory,

(For, this is) the Mantram of the Perfect Guru. [3]

Enshrining the Lord's Lotus-Feet in the heart’s bower :

Nanak lives in the remembrance of His Lord’s Power, [4-88-]57]

Gauri M. 5

Blessed is the place where they Sing the Lord's Praise,

And the Lord Blesses them with Gladness and Bliss, /{J—Pawse]

Pajn is where the Lord is remembered not.

(But), myriads of Joys there are, where the Lord's Praise is wrought. [1]
Forsaking the Lord, we enter upon endless Pain,

But, Dwelling upon Him, the Yama touches us not. [2]

That place is fortunate, eternal is the Abode,

Where is Uttered alone the Name of the Lord. /3/

Wherever we go, the Master goes along with us :

And, so Nanak has Received Him, the Inner-Knower (in the Mind). [4-89-1538]

Gavri M, 5

He, who Dwells on the Lord,

Lettered or unlettered, he Mounts to the highest State (of Bliss). /J/

In the Society of the Holy, Meditate thou on Gopal,

For, without the Lord’s Name, false are the riches of the world, [/-Pause]
He alone is Beauteous and Clever and Wise,

Who Surrenders himself to the Will of the Lord. [2]

His coming into the world of life is Approved

Who Sees the Lord in all hearts. [3/

Says Nanak, “He, whose Lot is perfect,

His mind Dwells on the Lord’s Feet". [4-90-159]

For, the one is lured by Vice, the other by the Love of the Lord, “/J-Pause]
Can a rider in bis imagination? ride the decked mare ?

Can the eunuch love a woman fair ? [J]

Can a bull be milked, even if tethered 7

Can the rider of a cow pursue a tiger? [2]

Can one worship a ram as the milch-cow of the gods ?

Can one go out to trade without capital or goods ?

Dwell thou, Nanak, on the Lord’s Name in thy Min

And Meditate on the Master, who's thy only y etind ‘[4-91-160]

Gauri M. 5

That intellect alone is Pure and soothes,

Which partakes of the Cure-all of the Lord’s Name. [J]

Make the Lord's Feet as thy Refuge

And thou art Rid of thy births and deaths. //-Pause/

That body is Pure of which issues no Sin,

And through the Lord’s Love, attains the Glory (of the Name). [2]
If thy Vices depart in the Society of the Holy,

This then on thee is the Lord’s highest Mercy. 3)

They, who are Imbued with the Love-Worship of the Lord,

Nanak seeks the Dust of such Saints’ Feet. /4-92-J6I]

Gauri M, 5

Such is my Love for Govind,
That He has United me with Himself and now Perfect is my Fate. [J-Pause]

1. ‘He ~Rerg’ (7 ATT) does not mean the ‘rider of the mind's (marc)’,

4)

(]

a

i]

3

Gauri M. 5 ,

The Lord's Servant keeps not company with a Sakata, the worshipper of Mayra;
2

)

4]

")

95%

Guru-Granth Salib 9999999999999999999909999999999999990020999999
Page 23
As the bride flowers on seeing her spouse,

So does the Lord's Servant live, mindful of the Lerd’s Name. [J]

As life flows through the mother's veins, on seeing the son,

So does the Lord's Servant weave himself, warp and woof, into the Lord, [2]
As the greedy eye is joyed to see the riches,

So does the Lord's Servant Cling to the Lord's Lotus Feet. [3/

Forsake me not for a moment, o Thou, the Beneficent Lord, ©

For, Thou art Nanak’s life-breath, OQ God. {4-93-J/62/

Gauri M. 5

He, who is inured to the Lord’s Cure-all,

Is pierced through with the Love-Worship of the Lord's Lotus Feet. [/-Pause] °
All other Tastes to him are vain and as dust,

And the world to him seems, without the Lord's Name, as without Fruit. {JJ
He, the Lord, Himself takes us out of the Blind Well ;

For such is the Merit of Govind ; such Wondrous is His Glory. [2]

In woods and vegetation, in the three worlds, is He, the Perfect Lord,

His is all this Expanse ; yea, He the Beneficent One for all life. [3]

Says Nanak : “That Speech alone is Pure,

Which is Approved by the Creator Lord”. {4-9¢-163]

Gauri M. 5 t

Bathe thyself each day in the Lord's Pool,

And Shake thou it, and Drink thou the Nectar of the Great Essence. /J-Pause]

Pure and Immaculate, like water, is the Lord's Name,

Bathe thou in it, and thou art fulfilled. /J/

In the Assembly of the Saints is uttered the Discourse (on the Lord) P. 199
And there, the Sins of myriads of our births depart. /2]

The Saint, who Dwells on the Lord, is in utter Peace.

For, his body and Mind are Imbued with the Great Bliss. (37

He, who treasures the Lord's Feet (in his heart),

Nanak, the Lord's Slave, is unto him a Sacrifice. [4-95-J64]

Gauri M. 5

Do thou that which soils thee not,

And thy mind Awakens to the Lord's Song. [/-Pause/

Dwell thou on the One : think not of Duality ; .
And, Dwell thou on the One Name of God, in the Society of the Holy, [1/ M
Let all thy religion, the way of works, fasting, worship, and daily conduct

Be this ; that thou knowest not another but the Transcendent Lord. [2]

Of him the Toil is Approved,

Whose rendezvous is only with his own Lord. [3/ 2
He is the True Vaishnava, of Infinite (Glory),

Who has rid himself of Sin, (and is Holy). {4-96-/65/

Gauri M. 5

They (thy kinsmen) who leave thee in thy life,

Of what avail can they be after thy death? [J]

Dwell thou on the Lord which is Writ in thy body and Mind.

For, of no avail is the poison (of Maya) to thee. [J-Pause]

He, who bas drugged bimsc! “th the Potion (of Maya),

The Thirst (for Evil) goes not ever irom sucha one. [2]

The Sea of the world is impassable, *t is the dreadful Sea of Pain.

And, one can go not across without the 7 ord’s Name? [3]

Nanak : Join thou the assembly of the Sai... oud Save thyself both here and Hereafter,
By Dwelling on the Lord's Name (for ever). [4-97-J66]

2220 Curu-Granth Sahib
Page 23
Gauri M. 5

The ‘bearded" (tyrant) who vent his wrath on the poor of the world,
Was burnt in the fire by the Transcendent Lord. [J]

For, perfect is the Justice of the Creator-Lord,

And He keeps safe His Slave and Bard. [J-Pawse]

The Lord's Glory is manifest since the birth of Time.

And the slanderer of Him dies of great pain. /2/

Who ever is Slam by the Lord is Saved by no one,

And here and Hereafter, Evil is the repute he earns, = /3/

His Slave the Lord keeps whole, Hugged to His Bosom,
Seek thou therefore, His Refuge, Nanak, and Dwell ever on His Name, [4-98-167]

Gauri M. 45

The memorandum? against me has proved false,

And the slanderers have come to grievous loss. [/}

He whose Support is Govind, the Supporter of the earth,

Him the Fama touches not. //-Pause]

He, who utters falsehood in the True Court,

He, the Blind one, strikes his head and writhes his hands (in remorse). [2
Them all Ailments aMict, yea, they who Sin,

For, the Lord Himself is the Judge of them. /3/

We are bound by our own actions,

And our riches forsake us when the life departs. [4/

Nanak sought the Refuge of the Lord’s (True) Court.

And so his Honour was Saved by Lord, the God. 5-99-68]

Gauri M. 5

Sweet to me is the Dust treaded over by the Saints :

I Received it, for, it was so Writ in my eternal Lot. //—Pause/

The grease of Ego that stuck to my mind, P, 200
Was cleansed wholly by the Dust of the Saints’ Feet, [7]

If one bathes one’s body, in many many waters,

One jis cleansed not, and one’s. Dirt clings to him. /2/

But, if one meets with the True Guru, the ever-Beneficent one,

And Dwells on the Lord, one rids oneself of the fear of Death. [3]

Deliverance, the World's Joys and the Way are all contained in the Lord’s Name :

Sing thou then in Love, O Nanak, thy Lord’s Praise. /4-/00-J69]

Gauri M, 5

The Lord's Servants attain to the (highest) State of Life.
And meeting them, one's Soul is IIlumined. [J]
They who Listen to the Lord’s Word with the cars and the Mind,
Attain Peace at the Lord's Gate. //-Pause]
They who Dwell, Nanak, on the Lord, night and day,
Are Hlest, by living ever in His Presence. /2-/0J-]70/

1. The reference here is to Sulhi Khan's beard. He, Akbar's General, had sworn on his beard to dethrone Guru
Arjun, the writer of this verse, and put in his place his elder brother, Prithi Chand (who swore greater allegiance to the
king and was a rival claimant of the spiritual throne of Guru Nanak). Sulhi, however, got burnt by accident in a brick-
kiln and thus was his design on the Guru frustrated by God.

2. The reference here is to a memorandum presented to Emperor Akbar against the Guru. Akbar on verification
found the charges to be false. :

Guru-Granth Sabb 99992922920299929999922909999299999929222
Page 24

BAIOCOCCECAOGOCHSSLC SOSOCSSOSOHCOCLCOPELE ESSE OPOLEOLOAOECE

,
Page 241

[ 192 ]
Gauri M, 35

I have found Peace through the Guru-God,

And all my Ailments and Sins have ceased to-be. [/—Pause]

Utter thou with the tongue the Name of the Lord,

That thy Ailments go, and Peace returns. [J]

Dwell thou on the infinite Merits of the Transcendent Lord,

And Emancipate thyself, Associating with the Saints. /{2/

Sing thou ever the Praise (of thy God),

That thy Ailments pass away and thy Friend's Servants are Saved. [3]
With thought, word and deed, Dwell thou on thy Master, O Nanak,
And seek thou ever, ever, His Refuge. [4-/02-/71]

Gauri M. 5

The light has returned to (my son's) eyes by God's Grace}.

All my Doubts are cast off and my Service is Approved. {/-Pause/
The Joy-giver has kept (my son) safe from the pox :

In His Mercy has He Blest me, yea, He, the Transcendent Lord. [J]
Nanak : he alone lives who Mecditates on the Lord’s Name ;

And, in the Society of the Holy, Drinks the Nectar of the Lord's Essence.

Gauri M. 5

Blessed is their fore-head, blessed their eyes,

Blessed the Devotees who love Thee, OQ Lord! [i]

How can one attain Peace without the Lord’s Name:

Utter, then, with the tongue, the Praise of thy God. {/—Pause]
Says Nanak : “Sacrifice am I unto him,

Who Dwells on the Lord of Nirvan.” [2-04-1973]

Gauri M. 5

Thou art my Counsel, Thou that art ever with me,

Thou alone Takest due Care of me. [J/

Such is my Lord, who Keeps me company in this world and Beyond,
And Saves thus the Honour of His Servants. /J-Pause]

He alone is Beyond, in whose Power is this Universe :

Night and day, then, O mind, Dwell thou on Him, thy Lord. /2/

His Honour alone is Approved and he alone Receives the Seal of Truth,
Whom the Lord Commands Himself in His Mercy. /3]

The Lord, Beneficent of Nature, Sustains all,

Cherish thou then, Nanak, the Name of thy Lord, /4-J05-J74]

Gauri M. 5

When the True Guru is in Mercy,

I Enshrine in my heart the Lord, the Supporter of the earth. [JJ
I attain Peace for ever by Dwelling on the Lord,

And the True King is Merciful to me. [I-Pause]

Says Nanak : ‘He, whose Destiny is Perfect,

Meditates he on the Name of the Eternal Spouse’. /{2-/06]

Gauri M. 5

(The Brahmin) spreads out his dhoti and on it he squats ;
And, like a donkey, gulps down" he all that comes his way. . [1]

(2-103-172]

P. 201

1. The reference here is to the recovery of (Guru) Hargobin, Guru Arjun's son, from an attack of small-pox

which in his childhood threatened his eye-sight.
2. oy (ag)—a ae" Z : throws into.

3998290 Guru-Granth Sahib
[ 193 ]

But, without Deeds', he is Emancipated not,
For, Emancipation comes from Dwelling upon the Lord’s Name, [/-Patse]
He bathes and anoints himself and worships (the deity),
Then threatens he with the knife to receive in charity?. [2]
He recites the Vedas, uttering them sweetly with the tongue,
But holds not his hand from violating life. /3,
Says Nanak : “He, on whom is the (Lord’s) Grace,
His heart is Pure and in it he Dwells on the Lord”, /3-/07]
Gauri M. 5

O dear Servant of the Lord, hold thyself in Poise in thy (mind's) Home,
That by the Grace of the True Guru, all thy Tasks are Fulfilled. //-Pause]
And thy God Slays all the Demons (within thee),

And Saves thy Honour, O thou Servant of the Creator-Lord! /f/

All Kings and kings of kings are under his sway,

Who Partakes of the Nectar of the Great Essence. [2]

And in fearlessness, Meditates on the Supreme Lord :

For, this is how one is Blest in the Society of the Saints. /3/

Nanak seeks the Refuge of God, the Inner-knower,

Who is his Supreme Lord and Master. /4-J08/

Gauri M, 5

He, who is Imbued with the Lord, is burnt not by fire,

Nor is he guiled by the wiles of Maya;

Nor is he drowned by water,

Blessed is he and fruition all his deeds. {J}

All fears are stilled with Thy Name, O Lord,

And, Meeting Thee, one Sings Thy Praise, //~Pause]

He, who is Imbued with the Lord, his Cares depart,

(But), he alone is so Imbued who is Biest by the Mantram of the Saints.
And he fears no longer the Yama's Rod,

And Fulfilled are all his hopes. [2/ so

Imbued with the Lord, one suffers not Sorrow :

Imbued with the Lord, one’s Mind is ever Awake.

Imbued with the Lord, one abides in the Abode of Equipoise :

Imbued with the Lord, one sheds one’s Doubts and Fears. /3]
Imbued with the Lord, one’s intellect is [llumined, .
Imbued with the Lord, immaculate is one’s Glory.

Says Nanak : “Iam a Sacrifice unto them

Who forget not my Lord, the God.” /4-J09]

Gauri M. 5

By making an effort (to join the Holy) our mind is at Peace ;

By treading the Path, all our Sorrows depart.

And, Dwelling on the Lord's Name, the mind is in Joy.

And, Sings sweetly the Praise of the Supreme Bliss. [J]

Peace there was all over me and Gladness entered my Home,

On meeting the Holy ones, the Demons (within me) hastened away, [Pause]
Seeing the Vision (of the Saints) my eyes became Pure,

And Blest was my Forehead that touched their Lotus-Feet ;

And fruitful became my body, Serving the Lord,

And by the Saint's Grace, I attained to the highest State (of Bliss). [2]
His Servants, the Lord Himself Supports :

I attained Peace by repairing to His Servants’ Feet.

When I shed my Ego, 1 became He,

And I sought the Refuge (only) of the Treasure of Mercy, /3]

When I’ve Received what | craved for,

What shall I go out to search for ?

My mind was stilled and | abided in the Seat of Peace,

And, by the Guru's Grace, I entered into the Realm of Bliss, [4<1/0]

1, * " (wcqdt) is now-a-days emyloyed in a bad sense, Ip the medieval literature, however, it implied ‘pure
» deeds’, See Sukhmeni, M. 5 (ory ge, woga wis stat).
2. i.e, compels others to give away in charity to bim.

Guru-Grenth Sahib 0909999999099999999902000999999999022222999902
Page 242- . -.

P. 202

t.
Page 243

[ 194 ]

Gauri M, 5

One gets the Merit of bathing in the holy waters myriads of times,

And of giving away millions and billions in charity,

If only the Lord's Name Dwells in his mind. //)

They, who Sing the Praise of the Lord, are all Pure,

And rid are they of their Sins by seeking Refuge of the Beneficent Saints. /{Pawse/
I earned al! the Merit of austerities and mental discipline,

And reaped great Profit, and was Fulfilled,

When my tongue Uttered the Name of the Lord. /2/

T discoursed (as if) on the Smritis and Shastras and the Vedas,

And knew the secret of Yoga and spiritual Wisdom and the Peace of an adept,
When | Dwelt on the Lord’s Name and my Mind was Pleased with the Lord. /3]
The Lord's Wisdom is Unknowable, Unfathomable, and Infinite,

And (is known if) we Meditate on the meaning of the Name!.

But so it is only when the Lord isin Mercy upon us. [4-//]J

Gauri M. 5

I attained Peace by Dwelling on the Lord,

And when I Enshrined the Guru's Lotus-Feet in the heart. [J]

The Guru-God, the Supreme Lord, is Perfect :

Meditating on Him my mind was at Peace. [Pause]

Dwell thou on the Guru's Name ever and for evermore,

And then all thy desires are Fulfilled, {2/

Seeing the Lord’s Vision one's Mind is at Peace,

And the Sins of all the past births are washed off. [3/

Says Nanak : “Whose is the fear now for me,

When the Lord is ever there to Save the Honour of His Servant 7" /4-//2]

Gauri M. 5

He, the Lord, is the Mainstay of His Servant,

And Sustains him, as do father and mother. [J]

Seeking the Lord's Refuge all are Saved,

For, the Doer and the Cause of every thing is He, the True One. /Pawse/
Now my mind abides in the Creator-Lord :

And my Fears are dispelled and the Essence of Spiritual Bliss is mine. [2/
He, the Lord, in His Mercy, Saves His Slave,

And his Sins of ages are washed off. = /3/

Says Nanak : “I can describe not the Glory of the Lord,

And so I seek ever His Refuge. {4-13

Rag Gauri Cheti M. 5, Dupadas
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Eulightener.
The Lord is All-powerful, O brother,

Being with Him, one is never in Pain?, [/-Pause/
Whatever is the wish of the Servant of the Lord, P, 203

‘That the Lord, the Creator, Fulfills. /J/

His slanderer loses all Honour :
So, Nanak Sings ever the Praise of the Fearless Lord. /2-//4]

Gauri M. 5

O Thou of Powerful Arms, Thou Brave—O Brahma, the Ocean of Peace,
I've fallen into the Ditch : Take me by the Hand*, and Save me, /J-Pause]

1. This shows that the mere utterance of the Name is not enough.
2. fagat (yar) : (pain) should be distinguished from fgger (state ; also, void),

3. nigdht = (siqérar) = Graal: Lit, finger.
PIII DIB3 S929 9799985298090 Guru-Grawil Sabib
My cars hear not, my eyes have lost their lustre,

And in Pain’, I, the legless one, cry out in prayer at Thy Door. {J}

© Thou Supporter of the Poor, Thou Merciful Friend, Father and Mother’,
Nanak holds fast to Thy Lotus-Feet in his heart :

For, Thy Saints Thou Enablest to Cross the Sea of Fear, [2-2-5]

{Rag Gauri Bairagan M. 5
Dp the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Rnlightener.

O Thou, the Creator, the Master, the Friend, Abide Thou with us. [J-Pause/

Without Thee, we live not ; and accursed is our life in the world.

O Thou, my Life’s Breath, I am a Sacrifice unto Thee each moment. [J/

Give me the Support ef Thy Hand and Take me out of the Ditch, O Gopal !

Tam without Merit, without intellect and Thou art ever All-mercy to the meek. [2]

What Merits of Thine can 1 recollect ? How can I think of Thee ? .

O Thou Lover of Thy Devotees, O Thou Refuge of all, O Thou High, Unknowable and Infinite: 3]
All the (four) life-objects, and the eight miracles one finds in the Quintessence of Thy Name,

When Thou, the Lord of Beauteous Hair’, art pleased, and we Dwell on Thy Praise. /[4/

Thou art my Mother, Father, Son, Kinsman, my Life’s Breath :

Nanak Dwells on Thee in the Society of the Holy and so Swims across the Sea of Poison. {5-1-Li6]

Gauri Bairagan, In the Measure of the Chhants' of Rahoe, M. 5
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Bulightener.

Is there one to Recite the Name of the Lord ?

He attains to all happiness and Truth, /{/-Pause]

The man, renouncing the world, goes searching Him out in the woods,
But rare is the one who is Attuned to the One (Lord) .

They, who attained to Him, are of good Fortune, [1]

For Him yearn the gods like Brahma and his sons :

And the Yogis, and the ascetics and the celibates ;

But, he on whom is His Grace, Dwells on the Lord's Praise. [2]
Seek thou the Refuge of those who forsake not the Lord,

It is by great, good Fortune, that one meets with the Saints :

And then one is born not again ; nor doth one die. [3]

Be Thou Merciful, O Lord, and Unite me with Thee.

Pray, hear my Prayer, O Thou, the Infinite, Highest of the High !
Nanak seeks from Thee but the Support of Thy Name. [4-J-/17]

Rag Gauri Poorbi, M. 5
Bip the Grace of the @ne Supreme Meimg, the Hiernal, the Hulightener.

How am I, O mother, to Meet my Lord, the God?  [J-Pause] P. 204
Without Beauty, without Wisdom and Power am I;

I, a stranger unto Him have come from afar. [JJ

Neither Riches have I, nor the pride of Youth ; ;

And, Supportless am | ; O, Merge me into Thyself, my Lord! (2)

Searching Thee, | have renounced all ;

And thirst I only for the Sight of Thee, my Master. [3]

anak : the Lord is All-merciful for the meek and Beneficent,

And He, through the Saints, has quenched my Fire. /4-J-J18]

1. ag (ara) : (Sans. ati), in the grip of pain.
ase (went) : (Sans. sent), of immense compassion (wae"),

Hazes! (gate) : mother.
ort (rat) : he who wears Reshas (hair), Vishnu.

aud & &3 (xgle # Pa) : an old folk-song.

GurueGrenth Sab 09092229329900999099802992999200909002222000000
Page 24

oe
9 SESSSOSEGEOCOCEEEECOEEE

Fage 245

My mind craves for its Union with the Lord,

I take to His Feet and pray

That I meet with His Saints by great, good Fortune. /J/—Pause]

I surrender to him my Ego and my riches and follow not the lead of my mind,

Forsaking all, I pursue, night and day, the one who Recites to me the Gospel of the Lord, [J]
When the seed of the past Karma sprouts,

I Meet with the Purusha, the Reveller and the Detached.

My Darkness is dispelled on Meeting the Lord, Nanak,

And I am Awakened after thé Slumber of Ages. [2-2-1 19]

Gauri M. 5

Come thou, O Bird, out (of thy shell), and, Dwelling on the Lord, get thy Wings ;
Seek thou the Refuge of the Saints and treasure the Perfect Lord's Jewel in thy heart. /J-Pause/

The glusion (of the world) is the Well : Desire in it is the Mud, and attachment to it the treacherous
nate,

Set thy mind then on the Lotus-Feet of the Lord of the Universe, Govind, the Saviour. [J/
Be Thou Merciful; O Govind, my Master, my Love, Support of the supportless, and Hearken to my
Prayer.

Take me by Thy Hand, O Master of Nanak, for this body and life are Thine. /2-3-J20/

Gauri M. 5

My mind craves to See the Lord :

I thirst for Him and rest my Hope and Reflect upon Him day and night, and ask :

“Is there a Saint that would bring my Lord near unto me? /{J-Pause]

I Serve his Slaves and Pray to him lovingly in many, many ways’.

I have weighed all pleasures : without the Lord, they are all so vain, [J/

When, by the Saint's Grace, | Dwell on the Praise of the Sea of Virtue,

My comings and goings ceased! for ever.

All Wy and Gladness are in Meeting the Lord, Nanak, and one’s life is Approved, like the dazzling morn,
2-4-J 2s]

Rag Gauri Poorbi M, 5

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Enlightener.

How may I See the Lord of the earth, my King ? :

Is there a Saint who Blesses me with Bliss and Equipoise and shows me the Way ? /J-Pawse] FP. 205
We know not the Unknowable within, for Ego screens Him off from us.

And the whole world Sleeps, lured by the love of Maya, how can then our Doubt depart? [1]

They live together (the Soul and the Over-soul) in one Home and yet talks not one to the other,

For, without the (Lord’s) Name, my Five* faculties of perception are unhappy :

But the Name is beyond the domain of perception.

He, whose Home it is, He verily also has locked it up, and the Key is in the Guru's hands,

Do What one may, one gets not the Key any otherwise, if one seeks not the Refuge of the Guru. /3/

They, whose Fetters are cut off by the Guru, Attune themselves to the Society of the Holy,
And the Five Sing the songs of Joy,

And, then, between me and the Lord there is no Separation. [4]
Thus is my Lord, the King, Attained,

And one Attains to Equipoise and one's Doubt departs,
And one’s Light Merges in the All-light. {J-Seeond Panse—J-J22)

1. gga" (aR) : Bays, again to return.
2. Ua (aa) : five Joanindriyas, faculties of perception or knowledge.

9@ Guru-Granth Sali
Such is my intimacy* with the Lord '

That the Beneficent Master’, in His Mercy, has Led me on to the True Guru. [J-Paure]

Wherever now I See, I See no one but the Lord, in all Faith :

Now who else shall | pray to, when the Lord’ Himself is there to hear? [J]

Dispelled is my Doubt, the Guru has cut my Fetters off, and I am Blest with the Peace of Poise.

All that has to happen must happen : where is then Pain or Pleasure? [2]

The universe and all divisons of the world, rest only on the One Lord.

This the Guru has Revealed, tearing off the Veil (of Maya).

When the nine Treasures of the (Lord's) Name are Enshrined in the only place (of the Mind), why and
whither is one torun? [3/

(Know thou that) the same gold is beaten into various patterns and designs,

And so still thy Doubt through the Guru, O Nanak, and Merge thy essence with the Essence of the
Lord. [4-2-123}

Gauri M. 5

Go, call on the Guru, for thy life wears off each day, each night :
And Fulfil thy Destiny, {/-Pause]

Hark, O my friend, I beseech thee, now is the time for thee to Serve the Holy,
If one earns Merit here, one lives in Bliss Hereafter. [J]
Worthless is the world's sojourn, if torn by Doubt ;

Only the Wise-in-God are Saved.

Thou art called the Purifier of the Sinners,

© Thou, the Giver of Joy, the Stainless, the Cool.

Nanak ; in this is all Wisdom, all Meditation, all Glory,

That one discourses with Thy Saints, {2-6-—/29]

Gauri M, 5

Meet me Thou, O my Dear, ~
All that happens proceeds from Thee. //-—Pawse]

1. wat (erat) ara ; work.
2 ofowfes upper (gfe Tat) : the animal (yAn) who cometh (nnfeG) sceing the afgs (adil, green) ficlda,

ie., stray cattle.
3. Gas: (owt) : (Sans, gpq), that what is said, speech.

4. Mohini, the hourl of Indra's Paradise ; here signifies Maya that entices away the world by ber charms.
3. fitdtut (fatten) : fifera, met.

Page 24
J wandered through many lives, and suffered great Eee again and again.

Iwas Blest with the body of a human by Thy Gra

Now Meet me, my King, my Lord! [ij

All that happened was in Thy Will ; none else but did or could (do a hg:

In Thy Will is the world lured by the Illusion of Maya and, being in Sleep, it Awakens not. [2]

O Thou, the life’s Master, my Beloved, the Treasure of Mercy,

0 Thou, the Beneficent One, hearken to my Prayer.

Save me, O my Father, my Lord, and Sustain Thou me, the Supportless one. [3]

He, whom Thou Blessest with Thy Vision for the sake of the Holy,

Him, in Thy Mercy, Thou Blessest (also) with the Dust of the Saint’s Feet and, this is the Pleasure that

Nanak also seeks, [{4-9-/30]
Gauri M. 5

lam a Sacrifice unto him,

Who leans solely on the Lord's Name, /J-Pause]

How can one Praise him, who is [mbued with the Lord's Love.

With him is Peace, Equipoise and Bliss ;

And, none equals him in Beneficence, [J]

He alone Saves the world,

Who thirsts for the Vision of the Lord.

He, who secks his Refuge Swims across,

And in the Society of the Saint, he is Fulfilled. {2]

I live by taking to the Feet of such a one,

And, in his company, am I Blest.

© Lord, be Thou in Mercy,

That my mind becomes the Dust treaded over by Thy Saints. 3]

The dominions, beauty, pride of life and all that seems in the world wear off.

(So) Nanak has earned the Treasure of the Lard'’s Name, which is ever-fresh, ever-pure. [4-30-31]
P.

Gauri M. 5

l came to the Guru to learn the Way of (True) Yoga,

And the True Guru Revealed it to me through the Word. [J-Pause]}
The nine divisions of the earth are within our body,

And I[ greet (Him, who is within it) each moment, each day.

The Guru's Instruction is my ear-rings,

And I’ve Enshrined the Formless One in my Mind. [i /

The Five Disciples’ are now under the sway of the one (Mind),

And the Ten Hermits? obey ever the command :

Thus have [ become a Yogi, the Stainless, the Pure. [f2)

I have burnt my Doubt and with its Dust have I smeared (my body).
And my Path is that | See the One,alone,

And my Food is the Peace of Equipoise,

Which the Master hath Writ in my Lot. [3]

Where there is no fear, there [ have Established my seat.
And the (Yogi's) horn is the Unstruck Music (within me) ;
And Dwelling on the Quintessence (of Reality) is my Staff,
And the Way is the Acceptance, in mind, of the Lord’s Name. /¢]
By great, good Fortune is such a Yogi met,

Who cuts off our Fetters of Maya.
Says Nanak : “I Serve him, Worship his person, and Kiss? the Dust of His Feet.” {5-11-132]

Gauri M, 5

Hearken ye to the Lord’s Name, the Thing beyond Praise,
And Dwell ye all on it, O friends !
He, whom the Guru Blesses with this Cure-all,
His mind is cleansed. (i-Pause/
1. The five Jnanindriyas (powers of hearing, touching, secing, tasting and smelling).
2. Five Jnanindriyas ana five Karmindriyas i.2., powers of speech, handling, locomotion, excretion and ; rocreéd-
tion. They are called hermits here, for, they have renounced their age-old sense-desires.
3, Lit. lick.

GuruBramih Sahib 9999999929999929999999220099999999902037999990090"
Page 24

TTC]
When the Light of the Word burns,

The Darkness within him is dispelled : .
And the Fetters of his Doubt are cut off,

Who has faith in the Society of the Holy. [J/

The Saint's company is the Boat wherewith the dreadful Sea of Existence is crossed ;

And our mind's Desire is Fulfilled, and we meet the Guru in Love with the Lord. [2]

And we Attain to the Treasure of the Lord's Name, through loving devotion,

And our body and mind are satiated.

Nanak : the Lord Blesses only him with it,

Who abides, by His Grace, in His Will. /{3-/2-133/

Gauri M. 5

O Life of my life, be Thou in Mercy :

I, the Supportless one, seek Thy Refuge.

I know no Wisdom : take me out of the Blind Well by Thy Hand. [J-Pause]

For, Thou art the only Doer : and there is no one to equal Thee.

Thou alone Knowest Thy Stale ; and they alone Serve Thee in whose Lot it isso Writ. [I]
With Thy Devotees Thou art Imbued, and weaved into them Thou art, warp and woof.

And as the Chakvi thirsts for the moon, so do they for Thy Vision. [2/

No distinction there is between them and Thee ;

(But) in millions is there one like this.

They, in whose heart art Thou Revealed,

Dwell on Thy Praise, night and day, and Utter Thy Name (alone) with the tongue. /3/

Thou art All-powerful, Infinite, Highest of the high, Giver of Feace, and Mainstay of my life.
Be Thou, O Lord, Merciful to Nanak, .
That he keepeth ever the Society of Thy Saints. /4-/3-134] P, 209

Gauri M. §

O (Guru) Saint, Thow art ever Imbued with thy Lord ;

O Thou master of our Destiny, abide with me and take me to my Destined end. /J-Pause]
Thou alone Knowest Thy Mystery ; Thou art the Perfect Person.

Take me, the meek and the supportless one, into thy Refuge, and Deliver me of my Bondage. [J]
Thy Feet are the Boat wherewith we Cross the Sea of Existence :

And, thou alone knowest thy Ways.

He, whom thou keepest with thee in thy Mercy,

He Swims across (the Sea of Existence), /2/

Here, Hereafter, all is in thy Power, OQ my Guru-God,

All is in thy hands.

Bless me with the Treasure, that goes along with me, 3]

Bless me, the Meritless one, with the Merit that my mind Dwells upon the Lord’s Name.
By thy Grace, O Saint, Nanak Unites with the Lord,

And his body and mind are Tranquilled and Cooled. [4-J4-i35]

Gauri M. 5

O God, I have attained to Equipoise, *

For, the True Guru is Merciful to me. f{J—Pause]

He has cut my Noose off, and made me His Own,

And engaged me in the Service of the Saints.

Such wondrous is the Vision I now See,

That I Worship nothing but the Lord's Name. {J}

The Guru has Revealed to my mind the Light of Wisdom, and all about me is Illumined,
I partook of the Nectar-Name and my Mind was sated, and my Fears were stilled, [2]
] surrendered to His Will and received All-peace, and the abode of Sorrow was shattered,
When the Master was Pleased, He Revealed to me all in the form of Pleasure. 3]
Nothing comes, nor goes (O man), it is the Play of the Lord, the King,

Nanak : He, the Master, is Unknowable, yonder of the yond,

And His Devotees have His Name alone as their Mainstay. {4—J5-136]

® Guru-Granth Salih

Page 24
Gauri M. 5

He is thy Transcendent, Perfect Lord :

O my mind, take to His Refuge.

He, who Created the universe and all the worlds,

Meditate thou on the Name of that Lord, /J-Pause]
Shed thy egocentricity, O Lord's Servant,

And be at Peace by Knowing His Will.

And accept, with pleasure, all that the Lord Does,

And Dwell upon Him in joy and sorrow, [J]

The Lord Saves myriads of Sinners,

And takes not a moment so to do.

He is the Dispeller of the pain and sorrow of the poor,
And may Bless whomsoever He Chooses. [2]

He is the Father, Mother, Sustainer, the Vital breath of all,
He is the Creator, the Ocean of Peace, the all-girdling Mount of Jewels,
Whose Treasure is emptied not by His Givings. {3]
Nanak, Thy seeker, seeks Thy Name, O Lord,

O Thou, who art in every heart.

And, he surrenders. himself to Thee,

From whom no one ever comes away empty. [4-/6-/37/

G
fi
=

1

Rag Gauri Poorbi M. 5

By the Grare of the ne Supreme Deing, the Hternal, the Tulightener.

Forget not the Lord ever from thy mind,

For, He is the Giver of Peace both here and Hereafter, P, 210
And ‘Sustains all hearts. /J-Pause]

If thy tongue utters His Name,

He Dispels, in an instant, all thy Sorrows,

In His Refuge is Calm and Contentment,

And the Fire that burns (within) is quenched. [J]

He Saves thee from the hell of the womb,

And takes thee across the Sea of Fear.

If one Dwells on His Lotus-Feet in his mind,

His fear of death departs. [2]

The Lord is Perfect, Transcendent, the Supreme God, the High, Unknowable and Infinite.
He, who Dwells on the Praise of this Ocean of Peace,

Gives not away his life in a vain ble. [3]

O Thou, the Beneficent Lord of the Meritless,

My mind is gripped by Lust, Anger, Avarice and Attachment :

Bless Thou Nanak with Thy Name that he is ever a Sacrifice unto Thee. [4-J-138]

Rag Gauri Cheti M, 5
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Enlightener, .

There is no Peace without the Worship of the Lord.

Make fruitful thy life, precious like a pearl,

By Dwelling for a brief moment (of thy life) on the Lord’s Name in the Society of the Holy.
[I-Pause

All have to abandon (in the end)

Their riches, wives, sons and pleasures; /J/

And their dominions too, and fine horses and elephants :

And leaving all behind, the ignorant ones go away maked. [2]

And the body, scented with the essence of Chandan,

Rolls in the end in the dust. [3]

Gurn-Granth Sahib 999929999099999999929999999999999999922999990099%

BAVSHOCS MSSHBGSCESE OOSCISAOCEGEGAIGSAEL CE SESHESEBSCECOGSS

i

Page 25
{ 202 }

Nanak : lured by Lust, one thinks the Lord to be afar,
But Knows one not that He is ever-present before us. /{4¢-J-J39]

Gauri M. 5

O my mind, we Swim across (only) with the Support’ of the Lord's Nams.
The world is the tumultuous Sea of Doubt,

The Guru's is the Boat that Ferries us across. {/-Pause]

We are enveloped by utter Darkness in the Kali-age,

And the Guru's Wisdom is the Light that [llumines all, [J]

The Poison of Maya is spread all through,

But he, who utters the Lord's Praise, is Saved. /{2/

The mind slumbers, intoxicated by Maya,

But, on meeting the Guru, our Doubts and Fears are shattered. {37
Says Nanak : “He, who Dwells on the One alone,

He Sees the Lord in every heart”. [4-2-J40)

Gauri M. 4

Thou art my only Court, O Lord,
And, I Serve Thee alone with the Guru’s support, {l-Pause]
I tried many ways but found Thee not,
And now the Guru has engaged mein Thy Service. [J]
And [ have overcome the Five Dissenters,
And I have won over the hosts by the Guru's Grace. [2/
And I Received the Lord’s Name as the Lord’s Bounty,
And I live ever in Bliss and have Peace and Equipoise. [3)
Nanak : they, who Serve the Lord, are Blessed,
And their faces look Beauteous. /{4¢-3-J¢]} ; P. 211

Gauri M. 5

O man, our only Refuge is the Lord's Name.

Whatsoever else we do, over our head hangs the fear of the Fama, {J-Pause}

We attain not to Him any otherwise, .

But through Meditation on the Lord, by good Fortune. [J/}

We know we are exceedingly clever and smart,

But Hereafter, all this is of no avail tous, /2/

He, who does (good) deeds, lured by Ego,

Is like the one washing his house of sand with water. [3]

When He, the Lord, is Merciful,

Then, Nanak, in the Society of the Saints, one Receives the Lord's Name. [4-4-1242]

Gauri M. 5

Iam a Sacrifice unto Thee, my Lord, a million times,

For, Thy Name, O Master, 1s the Mainstay of my life. /J-Pause]
fhou art the Creator and the Cause :

Thou art the Refuge of all Thy creatures. {J}

0 Lord, Thou art the Master of the beauteous and the rulers,
Thou art the Related, Thou the Absolute Lord, {2/

Thou Savest all both here and Hereafter,

And, it is through the Guru's Grace, that one Knoweth Thee, [3
O Thou, the Lord, the Inner-knower, the Wise,

Thou alone art the refuge and strength of Nanak. [4¢-5—J/43}

Gauri M. 5

Dwell thou ever on thy Lord,

In the Society of the Saints, the Lord Abides in our minds,

And we still our Doubt and Fears and Attachment. /7-Paywse]
The Vedas, the Puranas and the Smritis proclaim but this :
That the highest of the high are the Lord's Saints. [J]

1. og (We) : (Sans. oere,) support, refuge.

© Guru-Granth Sahi

Know ye that al! places are ridden with Fear,

Save the Lord’s Devotce's, which is devoid of it. /2]

(The others) wander through myriads of species,

Save the Lord’s Servants, who are neither born, nor die. [3]

When Nanak sought the Refuge of the Lord's Saints,

He shed all the pride of his power, intellect, knowledge and his Ego. [4-6-144]

Gauri M. 5

O my mind, Dwell thou on the Lord’s Name,

And Serve Him ever, and Meditate on Him with thy every breath. [J-Pause]
In the Assembly of the Holy, He Comes into thy mind:

And thy Sorrow and Pain and Darkness and Doubt are dispelled, [J]

When we Dwell upon Him, by the Saint’s Grace,

We are afflicted not by Sorrow, nor Pain. [2]

He, whom the Guru Blesses with the Mantram of the Lord,

He is Saved from the Fire of Maya, [3/

© Lord, be Thou in Mercy upon Nanak,

That Thy Name Permeates his body and mind, [{4-7-J45]-

Gauri M. 5

Utter the Name of the One alone with thy tongue.
Here, thou art Blest with immense Bliss and Hereafter it keeps company with thy Soul. [J-Pause]

And, the ailment of Ego departs from thee,

And, by the Guru’s Grace, thou attainest to the highest state of Yoga. [J/
He, who Tastes the Essence of the Lord,

His desire is (instantly) Fulfilled. [2]

And he obtains the Treasure of Peace,

And his mind wanders not about thereafter. /3/

He, whom the Guru has Blest with the Lord’s Name,

Nanak, all his fears he sheds, and all his Pain. /4-8J46]

{i-Pause/
He, whose heart awakens to Wisdom, by the Guru’s Grace,

On his hands? he has the nine Treasures, and the (eighteen) miracles, [7]
He, who knows the Lord as the Master,

Is bereft of nothing. /2]

He, who Realises the Creator Lord,

Enjoys his life and utter Peace. (3)
He, in whose Home is treasured the Lord,

Nanak, in his company all one’s Sorrows ‘depart. [4-9-147]

Gauri M, 5

How proud are we, knowing not how humble are our beginnings :
And, we cling to that what remains not. /J-Pause]
That, what is forbidden by the Vedas and the Saints,

That, indeed, is our first love.

And, we gamble away our life, overwhelmed by our sense-desires. [J]

He, who is our All-perfect Lord, who Fills and Empties all,

Of the Love of His Lotus-Feet we are devoid.

Nanak is Emancipated through the Saints’ Grace, which the Lord of Mercy has Blest him with.

[2-10-148]
Gauri M. 5

lam the Slave of my Master,
And | eat what He Blesses me with in charity*, {J-Pause]

1. agae (exe): fe., om the palm (ae) of the hand (ag)
2. ars (art) : whole rice, etc,, offered in charity. ‘

L)
&)
&
3
3
Gauri M, 5 g
He, who forgets the Lord’s Name, abides in Pain : P, 212
And he, who Dwells on the Lord, in the Assembly of the Holy, gathers the Treasure of Virtue.
7
3
5)
4

Page 252 waw.sikhbookelub.com
Page 253

f 204 ]

Such is my Master,

That, in an instant, He Creates and Embellifhes (all), (J)
I do only what Pleases my Lord,

And Sing of His Miracles and His Praise, [2]

And, I seck the Refuge of the King's Minister, di Guru),
By seeing whom my Mind is in comfort. 3)

The One‘alone is Nanak’s Support and Sit Mainstay,

And so he is engaged in His work alone. [4¢-JJ-149]

Gauri M, 5

Is there one who shatters my Ego,

And holds my mind from Maya's sweets? []-Pause/

Man has become Ignorant: He seeks what is not.

The Night is utterly Dark ; O Lord, how shall the Morning dawn? [J]

‘| wander and wander but find Him not, though T search’ Him out in many, many ways.

Says Nanak : “When the Lord is in Mercy, I find my Treasure in the Society of the Saints’’,
f2-12-I50]

Gauri M. 5

O Thou, the Wish-fulfilling Jewel*, O Thou, the Embodiment of Mercy! /J-Pausej
© Thou, the Beneficent of the poor ; O Thou, the Transcendent Lord !

O Thou, in whose Worship is all Peace! /I'}

O Thou, the Eternal Purusha ; O Thou, whom knowledge knoweth not.

When | Hear Thy Praise, myriad of my Sins depart.

O Thou, the Treasure of Mercy, be Thou in Grace,

That Nanak repeats Thy Name ever and for evermore. [{3-/3-J5]]

Gauri Poorbi M. 5

O my mind, seek thy Peace in the Lord’s Refuge.

For, the day one forgets one’s Lord, is wasted away in vain. /J-Pause]

One came here only for a night and now hopes to abide for ages ;

But, the home and the riches one has, are like the (passing) shades ofa tree. [J]

The body, the riches and the estates go they all ;

If we forsake the Lord, the Giver, in an instant they vanish away from us. [2] P. 213.
We wear white afler a scented bath ;

But if we Realise not the Fearless and the Formless Lord, our bath is (vain) like the clephant’s*, [3]
When the Lord is in Merey, He Unites us with the True Guru,

And we find Peace in the Lord’s Name.

And we are Delivered and our shackles broken,

And we Dwell on the Praise of the Lord. /4-/4—]52]

Gauri Poorbi M. 5

O my mind, Dwell ever on the Guru-God :
For, this thy precious birth He hath made Fruitful.
, lam a Sacrifice unto His Vision, [/-Pause]
As many breaths one breathes, and as many morsels one mouths,
As Many times should one Praise the Lord.
When the True Guru is in Mercy,
Then alone do we attain to this Wisdom. [/}
O mind, we are Released from the Yama's bondage,
If we Utter the Lord’s Name and Attain the highest Bliss,
Serve thou thy Master, the True Guru, the Beneficent,
And all thy mind's Desires are Fulfilled. /2/

1. ag (att) : 2a : search,
2. fdanfz ‘Gicerat) * a fabulous gem supposed to yield to its possessor all desires.
a Por, immediately after the bath, he rolla again in dust.

1220 Guru-Granth Sahib
The Lord's Name is thy Beloved, thy Friend, thy Son, the Creator,
And it goes along with thee, O my mind !

Serve thou then thy True Guru,

And gather from him the Lord’s Name in thy Skirt. [3]

When the Lord is in Merey, all thy Doubts are dispelled :
And, Nanak, thou attainest Peace through the Lord's Praise, and all thy Sorrows depart. [4-J5-J53]

Rag Gauri M. 5
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Bternal, the Bnlightener.

Rare is the one who has stilled his desires. {/-Pause]

One gathers millions but gathers not the mind :

And fights for more, for more and more. [J]

He has a beauteous, and a bedecked wife, and yet commits ‘sin’ in another's home,
For, he knows not good from evil. [2]

In a myriad ways, one is bound to Maya and wanders about,

And Sings not the Praise of the Treasure of Virtue ;

And his mind is engrossed in the Poison (of Maya). [3]

He, on whom is the Lord’s Grace, (his Ego) dies in life,

And he Swims across the Sea of Maya, joing the Society of the Holy.
Nanak : such a one is Blest at the Lord's Gate. [¢—J/-/54]

Gauri M. 5

é)
all
wil
CJ
é)
5)
3
3
Thou, © Lord, art the Essence of everything, [J-Pause] 2
Some are engaged in Yoga, others in indulgence ;
Some in knowledge, others in meditation ; 3
And some but keep the Yogi's staff. /J/ 2
Some are engaged in contemplation, others in austerities, @
Others in offering oblations to the fire, and observing religious discipline ;
And some but wander about and about. /2/
2)
&)
2
]
3
4

Some (are pilgrims to) the holy banks of rivers, and discourse on the Vedas.
O Nanak : (not this. but) be thou a Devotee in Love with thy Lord. [3-2-J55]

Gauri M, 5

My Treasure is the Praise of Thee, O Lord! /J-Pause/

Thou art the Essence, Thou the Praise, Thou the Form, Thou the Colour :

Thou art my only Hope. [J]

Thou art my Pride, my Bounty ; Thou my Honour, my life's Breath.

The Guru hath forged (again) the broken chain (of my life). [2]

Thou art in the home, the woods, the village, and the ruins. P. 214
O God, how near, how near, art Thou! /3-3-J56]

Gauri M, 5

I am inebriated with the Love of the Lord. [J~Pause]

I Drink Him, in, and am Immersed in Him.

It is the Guru who has Blest me (with His Name).

And my Mind is Imbued with Him, [i

He is the furnace ; He the (cooling) plaster.

He is the cup", He the desire’ (for the drink) :

And my mind takes that to be Peace. [2]

(My Mind) is joyed in Equipoise and in the play of Bliss.

Ended is my Round and I am at one with the Lord.

Lo, Nanak, I am pierced through with the Guru’s Word. [3-4-157]

1. da ofa (ge aft) : He who keeps (fg) the staff (3a), fe., the Yogi,
2. fuerd (fet) = furs (fire) : cup.
3. ge (war) = gal: desire,

Page 25
[ 206 ]

Rag Gauri Malwa M. 5

By the Grace of the One Supreme Weing, the Hternal, the Zrlightener.

Utter thou the Name of the Lord,

For Hereafter one goes the hard, dreadful Way. {/-Pause]
Serve thou thy Lord for ever, for, death hangs ever over thy head.
Serve thou the Saints that the Yama's noose is loosed. [J]

One performs pilgrimages, Yajnas, oblations to the fire,

But in Ego, His Sins multiply.

And he is subject to heaven and hell and is cast into the womb again and over again. [2]

Neither the abode of Shiva, nor Brahma, nor Indra is eternal, or moveless,
And, without Service of the Lord, one attains not Peace,

The worshipper of Maya but comes and goes. [3]

Says Nanak : “As was the Instruction of the Guru, so is my Prayer.

Hearken, O my mind, and Dwell on the Lord's Praise that thou art Saved,”

Rag Gauri Mala M, 5

[4-I-158]

By the Grace of the @ne Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Enlightener.

I attained Happiness with.a child’s mind :

And, having met with the Guru, joy and sorrow and loss and death, and[pain and pleasure were all

alike forme. /{J-Pause]
Led by my intellect, I suffered and grieved,

But when I Met the Perfect Guru, the Merciful, imperceptibly I Dwelt in Bliss, [1]

All the acts ] practised with a clever mind,

All those were like the Chains of Bondage, :

But when the Saint Blest with his Hand my Forehead,

I was Delivered. [2/

When I| grabbed things, saying “They’re mine, They're mine”,
I was surrounded by Maya,

But when | surrendered my body and mind and intellect to the Master, I Slept in Peace. [3

So long as I carried over my head the load of Maya, my mind was taxed,

But when I threw away my Load, and met the Perfect Guru, I was rid of all Fears. /f-4-159]

Gauri Mala M. 5

I] have shed all my craving’,

For I have met with the Guru.

Now I've attained Peace, and Bliss and Ever-Joy.

For, I've surrendered my self to the Lord’s Will, {J-Pause]

For me, now, honour and dishonour are alike,

For, my head lies jon the Guru's Feet?.

Neither riches please me nor pain discomforts me ;

For, I'm in Love with my Master, [i]

He, the Master, Abides in the home? and is Revealed (also) in the woods.
I've become fearless and shed all my Doubts, by the Saint's Grace,
(And now I See) the Perfect One Pervading all. [2]

Whatever now the Lord does,

Seems sweet to my mind,

And, by the Saint's Grace, 1. .b- Assembly of the Holy,

My mind is awakened out of Sleep, /3]

ees

Page 255

1. wag (TET) = Feat : desire, .--~ing,
2. una (arfrat) : From ua, feet.
_3._ Hn erl (are arrtt) : ie. the dweller (grrgt) of the home (stn, ZH).

P, 215

@ ‘Guru Branth Salih
Nanak seeks Thy Refuge, O Lord, ; a
And in the Love of Thy Name, he Enjoys the Bliss of Equipoise,
And Pain then touches him not. /4-2-160]

Gauri M4la M. 5

I've found the Jewel (of the Lord's Name) in my Mind,

And my body and Mind are Cooled, |

And I Merge in the Guru's Word, //-Pause/

My Hunger is sated ; my desires and cares are abandoned ;

For, on my Forehead is the Hand of the Perfect Guru.

With the conquest of the mind,

I've conquered the whole world. 7

Within my heart, I feel Fulfilled,

And my mind now wavers not.

The Guru-given Treasure is inexhaustible, and of it there is no limit. /2/
Wonder, O world, hearken ; the Guru has Revealed to me the Mystery :
And the Veil is now torn off and I stand in the Master's Presence,

At peace with the whole universe’. [3]

Wondrous it is, and ineffable ; but he alone knows who Tastes it.

Says Nanak : “The Truth has dawned on me and I treasure the Guru's Bounty in my heart’. [4-3-161)

Gauri Mala M. 5

We are Saved in the Refuge of our Lord, the King :

All other worlds are the spheres of Maya : (for), they all fall to the ground. /J-Pawse]
The great men, who Dwelt on the Shistras, the Smritis and the Vedas

Have said thus ;

That without Meditating on the Lord one is Saved not :

And, not one, without it, has attained Peace. [J]

Gather one may the wealth of the three worlds,

But the waves of Avarice subside not,

How can one hold one’s mind without the Lord’s Worship :

The mind that wanders at all times, [2

One enjoys oneself in a myriad ways,

But goes not the Desire of the mind.

And, one is burnt ever in Fire and is never in Peace.

Without the Lord’s Name, all his works are vain, {3/

Dwell thou on the Lord's Name, O friend,

In this is the Essence of all Joy.

In the Society of the Holy end our births and deaths,

And we become (humble like the) Dust for the Servants of the Lord. [4-4-J62/

Gauri Mala M. 5

Who is to Reveal to me the Mystery (of the Creator-Lord) ?

If man were the Creator, only then: he would know. /{/-Pause]

The man does all in Ignorance, and practises not Meditation, nor Austerity ;

And his mind wanders in the ten directions.

Now, how can this mind be held ? [7]

One says : “I am the master of my body, mind and riches ; they belong to me and to them”.  P. 216
Riddled by Doubt and Attachment, he knows not the Real,

And like an ass, his foot is tethered. f2j

What was he then doing, the man, when he was not in being,
And when only the Lord, the Immaculate, the Formless One, was, and did all by Himself ? [3]

He the Creator alone knows the Mystery of His Wonders : .
For Nanak, He alorie is the Cause of all causes ;
And, (only) through the True Guru is our Doubt dispelled. {4-5-/63]

1. afg yare} (arf gene) ; jealousy (3rf3) of another (yarel),
Gurv-GCroith Sahih 0909999995999999999990959999999999990999

Page 25
[ 208 ]
Gauri Mala M. 5

Without the Lord, all else is an Iusion—

All contemplation, all austerities, all Yogic discipline, all actions :

For, one is robbed of these, this side of the Yond’. //-—Pause/

The fasting, the routine of religious discipline, all these are vain®.

Hereafter, the Way is different and these are of no avail There. [J]

One bathes at the holy places, and wanders about on the earth,

But gets not Peace Hereafter.

This (world’s) way is of no avail ; with it That World is pleased not. /2/
One recites from memory the four Vedas, but gets not Peace Hereafter,

For, if one Knows not the Nectar-Word?, the rest is all sound and fury. [3]
Nanak utters this thought that he, who Practises it, Crosses (the Sea of Existence).
Serve then thy Guru and Dwell upon the Lord's Name :

And shed thou the Ego of thy mind. /4-6-J6¢/

Gauri Mala M. 5

O my Lord, Maya's Spouse, I Utter Thy Name.

For, of ourselves we can do not a thing, and we abide as is Thy Will. [{I-Pause]

What can a creature do? Is he the Creator ?

O Thou, the Perfect Master, I engaged myself as is Thy Pleasure. [J]

Take Pity on me, O Thou, the Beneficent One, and attune me to Thy only Being.

Says Nanak : “It is my Prayer to Thee, Father, make me Dwell only upon Thy Name”. [2~7-165]

Rig Gauri Majh M. 5

By the Grace of the ne Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Hulightener,

O, Thou Beneficent of the meek, O Thou Damodara®,

O King, my Dear,

Thou hast engaged myriads of people in Thy Service.

Thou art the Lover of Thy seekers', this is Thy Nature’,

O Thou, who Filleth all places! [JJ

What are the Deeds that make me See Thee ?

I See Thee, sitting at the Saint's Feet.

I Sacrifice myself unto Thee a myriad times,

And I make my bowings at Thy Feet. [2]

The Pundit searches the Vedas (for Thee).

(For Thee), the renouncer bathes at the holy rivers.

(For me), all song, all music, is in Thy Praise.

And I Dwell on Thy Name, © Fearless Lord! 3) P. 217
My Master is Beneficent unto me,

And He has made me, a Sinner, Pure, for I've repaired to the Guru’s Feet.
He has rid me of my Doubts and Fears and made me envy-free.

Yea, the Guru has Fulfilled the Desire of my Mind. [4]

He, who attained to the Lord’s Name, is the master of Riches,

He, who Dwelt on the Name, attains Glory.

He, who keeps company with the Holy, his Deeds are Pure,

And, Nanak, he, the Lord's Servant, Merges in Equipoise. /5-J-166]

Page 257

1. Gd yA (at qe) : which is robbed (Hf) this side(G3, 3),

2, img (aig) : half (nrg, sw) of a Kowrie ; a very small coin.

3. Homyg (qaTat) : qa (Pre. or nectar-like from AU) ++-ntes (word),

4. ura? (s1r3)—H'— ug : The u@ (ge, Master) of Maya (Hr).

5. wited (witez) : He, round who! waist (Gqg) is the cord (@), Krishna ie., God.
6. Faa-Tes (Wrd-7eq) ; who loves (q_,* =>—7g) his devotecs (wag).

7. fawe (fare) : (Arabic). dailv routine.

2292090 Guru-Granth Satih
[ 209 }
Gauri Majh M. 5

O my Lord, my Dear, come into my Home.

Night and day, with every breath, I Call on Thee.

O Saints, I fall at your Feet, deliver to me the Message (of my Lord)>

O Lord, how can we Swim across (the Sea of Material Existence) without Thy Support? [J]
In Thy company we are in utter Bliss,

As are all vegetation, all woods and the three worlds.

My bridal bed looks beauteous : my mind is in Bloom :

Seeing Thy Vision, I attain this Peace. /2/

I Wash Thy Feet, and Serve Thee ever, O Dear,

And Worship Thee and bow down and make Flower-offerings? to Thee, my God.
Iam the Slave of Thy Slaves and Dwell on Thy Name,

And I Pray ever to no one but Thee. [3/

My Desire is fulfilled, and my body and mind are in Bloom :

Seeing Thy Sight, all my Sorrows have fled.

Says Nanak : “O God, | am Saved by Dwelling on Thy Name,

And have attained (the strength) to contain® this Supreme Joy,” [4-2-167]

Gauri Majh M. 5

Hear Thou, O Friend, O my Dear Love,

My body and mind are Thine, and I offer my Soul also to Thee.
Let me not forget Thee, O Thou, the Mainstay of my life,

For, I ever take to Thy Refuge. [J/

Meeting whom our mind is in Bloom,

By the Grace of the Guru, that Lord have I found.

For, all belongs to the Lord—all (beings), all places :

I am ever a Sacrifice unto my Lord. /2/

One treasures and is Attuned to

The Lord’s Name, the Immaculate, by great good Fortune.
When one finds the Perfect Guru, all one’s Sorrows depart,

And one Sings, day and night, the Lord’s Praise. /3/

Thy Name, O Lord, is the Precious Jewel :

Thou art the True Merchant, Thy Devotees are Thy Pedlars.
True is Thy Capital-stock, True is Thy Trade.

And, Nanak, Thy Slave, is ever a Sacrifice unto Thee. /4-3-J68)

Rag Gauri Majh M, 5

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Enlightener.

Thou art my only Pride, O my Creator,
By Thy Power | abide ever in Peace ; Thy True Word is my Pass-word, /J—Pause]
knew all, but kept mute :
I was Awake never, for, I was lured by Maya. [J] .
That in what I was mstructed (by the Guru), I also saw with my own eyes. P, 218
But the foolish, greedy man in me hearkened not to what | was told. /2/
It is not one, two or four, but the whole world is beguiled by the same allurements :
And rare is the one who Loves the Lord’s Name ; rare the place which isin Bloom, [3]
Thy Devotees, Lord, look Beauteous at Thy Gate : and Revel day and night,
And are Imbued with Thy Love : So, Nanak is a Sacrifice unto them. [{4-J-J69)

Gauri Majh M. 5

Thy Name, O Lord, is the Dispeller of Sorrow,
So I Dwell on the Wisdom of the Perfect Guru, night and day, [J-Pause]

1. meg! (agat) ; (Sans, wai), worship, adoration,
2. Lit. Nanak then béars the unbearable Bliss.

Page 25
[ 210 ]

The heart, in which Abides the Supreme Lord, is a Beauteous place.

He, whose tongue Utters the Lord’s Praise, the Yama’s Couriers touch him not. [J]

1 was awake not to the Service of the Lord, nor did I Dwell upon Him.

But Thou art (in the end) my only Refuge, O Lire of all life, O Infinite, Unknowable Thou! 2]
When Thou, the Lord of the earth, art in Mercy, hasten away all my Sorrows ;

And even the hot winds touch me not and Thou Keepest me whole, [3/

The Guru is the Lord, the God, the Truc Creator. ‘

When He, the Guru, is Beneficent, [ Receive all His Bounties.

Gauri Majh M, 5

The Lord, my God, is All-pervading.

Dwell upon Him that thou art Fulfilled. {/-Pause/

Uttering the Lord's Mame, our mouth becomes Pure :

He, who recites the Lord's Praise, is our brother. our friend, []/

All precious things, all rewards, all Merits are from Him. the Lord

Why forsake that Lord from the mind Dwelling on whom we shed our Sorrows. [2]

He, in whose company we live and Swim across the Sea of Material Existence,

Meet Him thou in the Assembly of the Holy and Save thyself that thy Face Sparkles in the Lord's
Court, [3

He is the teapfeststock of the Saints, He, the Supporter of the earth.

Nanak (too) is Saved by Dwelling on His Name and receives Acclaim at the True Gate, [4-3-/7]]

:
i]
Says Nanak, “I am a Sacrifice unto my Lord, the God". [4-2-/70]
é)
)
f)

Gauri Majh M. 5

O my life, Sing thou the sweet Praise of the Lord.

Imbued with the True One, even the Placeless one gets a Place. //J-Pause/

All other tastes are tasteless ; for, they make the body and mind Impure.

Accursed is that which life does without Him, /1/

Take thou to the Skirt of the Saint, and Swim across (the Sea of Existence).

And Dwell on the Transcendent Lord, that all thy kindreds (too) are Saved. [2

He (alone) is my Friend, Kinsman and Mate, through whom is Enshrined the Lord's Name in my heart,
And who Washes off all my Sins and is Beneficent (thus) to me. /3/

All riches and treasures and-homes are like a ruin : the Lord's Feet are the (only True) Treasure.

Nanak is a seeker at Thy Door, O Lord, and secks only Thy Bounty of Thee. {4-4-/72]

Geek

1S

Rag Gauri M. 9

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Tnlightener.

O Saints, shed the Ego of the mind : P, 219
And hasten away ever from Lust, Anger and the society of the Impious. [ I-Pause]

He, who looks alike on pain and pleasure and on honour, dishonour,

And rises above joy and sorrow, he alone Knows the Quintessenee (of the Real). {1

He, who neither praises nor dispraises, and searches only the State of Nirvan,

He indeed is the rare one, who, through the Guru, learns to play the hard role. [2-/}

Gauri M. 9

O ye Saints, all Creation is of the Lord :

(And yet when) the one falls to the ground, the other hopes he is to stay here (for ever).
I know not the Mystery of this Wonder! /J-Pause]
One is gripped by Lust and Anger and Attachment,
And forgets the Being Supreme.

One believes as true the mortal frame,

Which is but like a night's dream. [JJ

All that seems passes away

Like the shadow of the clouds.

Nanak believes the world to be ‘false’,

And so seeks the Refuge of the Lord. [2-2]

OS GOSSECOSECOOCHSESPOSHSSCOSHSSCEEEG

Page 259 
Man Enshrines not the Lord's Praise in his. mind,

And is engrossed in Maya, night and day ; how can he Sing His Praise? [J-Pawse]
He binds himself to his sons, friends and the love of Maya.

Like a deer’s delusion is the world false,

But he runs after the mirage all the same. [J]

He forgets the Master who Delivers him and Sustains.

Nanak : among myriads is he the one who Meditates on the Lord. [2-3]

Gauri M, 9

© Saints, this mind is held not,
For it keeps the company of mercurial desire,
And keeps itself not at peace. /i-Pause/
And Anger is in man’s heart,
On which account he has lost his mind.
(But), cheated of the jewel of Wisdom,
- How can he hold his anger? [J]
The Yogis have despaired, so also those chanting (mechanically) the Praise of the Lord,
But when, Nanak, the Lord is in Mercy upon His Servants,
Then alone the Way is found. [2-4]

Gauri M. 9

© Saints, Utter the Praise of the Lord,

The life of man is priceless ; why waste it away in vain? /J-Pause]
He, who is the Purifier of the Sinners and Friend of the poor,

Seek thou His Refuge.

He, by Dwelling on whom the Gajraj' shed his fear,

Why forsake Him? [i

Rid thyself of Ego, and the love of Maya,

And Attune thyself to the All-pervading Lord.

Says Nanak ; “This is the Way of Deliverance :

Turn thy mind God-wards and Attain to it." [2-5]

Gauri M. 9

O mother, is there one who can Instruct my straying mind ?

It hears the Vedas, the Puranas and the Way of the Saints, P, 220
But, Dwells not on the Lord’s Praise even for a moment. /J-Pause/

One obtains the precious body of man, yet wastes away the human birth,

And falls for the love of the treacherous mazes of Maya. [1]

The Master, who is with us both within and without, Him he loves not,

(But), Nanak, he alone is Emanipated, in whose heart Dwells the Lord. [2-6]

Gauri M. 9

O Saints, in the Refuge of the Lord is Peace.

One may-hear the Vedas and the Puranas but.for this alone,

That one may Dwell upon the Lord’s Name. [J-Pause]

Greed, the love of Maya, the service of Evil,

And pain and pleasure : he, whom these affect not, is the embodiment of God. [J]
As is heaven to him, so hell ; as is nectar, so poison ;

As is gold, so copper ;

As is honour, so dishonour ; as is attachment, so unattachment. /2/
And who is bound not to joy and sorrow :

He, Nanak, is the man of Wisdom,

He of all is Emancipated, whose Way is this. [3-7]

1. The reference here istoa story in the Bhagwat Purana, in which the Gajraj, a Gandharva, being cursed
became an elephant and was seized by an oclopus. He thereupon prayed to Ged and was rescued by Him ia the form of

Vishnu.
Guru.Granth Sahib e2ge2ar2e0090020000000000099000099000020090000998
Page 260
SOC

SS

SB GCOOSSLOSCOOOSHEEOSOSOGOGOS

Page 261

Gauri M. 9

O my mind, why art thou gone mad ?

Know thou that thy life wears off as days pass,

Why then has greed made thee so low?) [J-Pause]

One's body and home and wife which one considers one's own

Are not one’s own, if only one gives it thought. [J

Man wastes away his life and Knows not the Way of the Lord

And Attunes not himself to the Lord's Feet

In vain does his life pass away. [2]

Says Nanak : “He alone is in Peace who Sings the Lord's Praise.

The rest of the world is lured away by Maya and attains not to the State of fearlessness.” [3-8]

Gauri M, 9

O unconscious man, fear all sin:

And seek thou the Refuge of the Lord, the Beneficent of the poor, the Dispeller of Fear. {J-Pause]
He, whose Praise is Sung by the Vedas and the Puranas.

Enshrine His name in thy heart.

For, All-purifying in the world is the Name of the Lord :

Dwell thou on it and Wash off all thy Sins. [i]

One attains not the human body again,

‘So, Seek thou some Way of Deliverance (now).

Says Nanak : “Cross thou the Sea of Material Existence by Dwelling on thy Beneficent Lord.”
[2-9-251]

Rag Gauri, Ashtapad's
Gauri Guareri M. |

Bay the Grace of the ®ne Supreme Being, the Hternal, the All-pervading,
the Greator, the Plurusha, the Gnlightener.

The (nine) Treasures, and the (eighteen) miracles lie in Dwelling on the Lord’s Name,
Destroying the Poison (of Maya), one Sees the Lord Pervading all.

Abiding in Him, the Pure One, I am rid of the three-faced Maya,

And the Guru’s Instruction is of avail to my Soul. [JJ

And thus Dwelling on the All-pervading Lord, my mind is sated,

And with the Collyrium of Wisdom (in the Mind's Eyes), P. 221
To me is Revealed the Guru's Word, [/-Pause]

1 Enjoy now the Real Peace and I am Merged in Equipoise,

And, through the Pure Word, my Doubt is cast away. .

(I shed the false) Colour of Maya and am Imbued with the Lord's Crimson Red,

And His Grace is upon me, and the (M4y4’s) Poison is destroyed, /2/

When my life turned away (from its lures) and in life | was dead (to M4y4) and so Awake :
And I was Attuned to the Lord, by Dwelling on the Word,

T ingathered the (Lord's) Essence and rid myself of the Poison.

I Abided in (the Lord's) Love, shedding fear of the Yama. [3]

T lost my (worldly) tastes, and Strife and Ego,

And my Mind was Imbued with the Lord. through the Will of the Infinite.
And my caste was lost in this Deed of Honour.

And the Lord’s Grace was up on me and my Soul abided in Bliss, [4]

O Friend, without Thee, I see not another :

Whom then shall I serve, whom offer my mind ?

Whom shall I ask then ? Whose Feet shall I take to ?

Whose, O whose, Instruction will Attune me to Thee, my Lord? [5/
Serve thou the Guru, repair thou to His Feet,

And Meditate on the Lord and be Imbued with His Name,
Let the Lord’s Love be thy Instruction and thy fare, —

And being Attuned to His Will, enter into thy Self. /6]

ey td) cd xd od dd ed ad ee ed 2 Guru-Grarth Bahib
ae ae

Thy Ego will depart and thy Soul, transfixed (in thy Lord), will abide in P
And thy Light will Merge in the All-light. .
Lo, the Writ (of eternity) could be erased not ;

(And so) I received the Standard of the Lord's Name,

And deemed God to be the Creator and the Cause. [7]

(Now), I deem myself neither a Pundit, nor clever, nor wise,

Nor am | strayed from the Path to be lured by Doubt.

I have become Mute, and accept the Lord's Will:

And through the Guru's Word, I Merge in Equipoise. [8-1]

Gauri Guareri M. 1

e}
e)
)
F)
6)
g)
C)
é
&)
Ey
o
Bi
e)
J
J
e)
é
E)
F
2,
é)

The mind is the (wild) elephant in the body's forest : if

The Guru’s is the goad, and it bears the stamp of the True Word; ih

And (so) at the Gate of my King, it is Honoured, [J] a

Being clever, one finds Him not : g}

Without silencing (the mind), how is one to be prized? f{?-Pause] é

The Nectar at Home is being thieved, 7

And no one says ‘no’ to the Deccivers, )

He the Lord, Holds (our minds) and brings us Glory. [2] ; 6)

Limitless is the fire (of Desire) at the seat (of the mmd), 2

(But), with the water of the Guru's Wisdom, it is quenched, :

And one makes an offering of one’s mind (to the Guru) in Joy, and Praises one’s Lord. [3]

He, the Lord, is in our home, as He is without. 3

What else may I say, caged in the Cave (of Time) ?

He is the same on the seas as on the mountains. [4 Q

He, who is dead to his self, who can slay him (again) ? 3

He, who is without fear, what can fear do to him ?

He, who Knows the Word, Knows all the three worlds. [5] 3

He, who (merely) says (the Truth), indulges in vain talk,

But he, who Knows, Knows also Peace and Eauinoise, 2

And Seeing and Reflecting (on the Truth) his Mind Believes. [6]

All Glory, all Beauty, all Deliverance is in the Lord's Name.

In it Abides the Lord, the Immaculate One.

He Abides in His Self, in His Own Seat. [7/

Praise Him myriads of Saints in Love ;

And, Enshrining the True One in the mind, their minds and bodies are Pure.

Dwell thou, then, Nanak, on the Lord, ever and for ever more, [8-2] P. 222

i]

Gauri Guareri M, 1

If the self dies not, thy task remain$ unfulfilled.

The mind js in the grip of the Demons of Duality and Evil intent.

(But), when the mind accepts the Guru's Way, it becomes whole, [J]

The Lord, without attributes, is yet swayed by Merit. .

But he alone, who surrenders himself (to God), Knows the Truth, /J-Pause]

The mind strays, lured by Evil,

And when the mind falters, the weight (of Evil) oppresses the head.

But, when the mind accepts (the Will), it Sees nothing but the One, the Absolute Lord. /2]

The mind, losing (its way), strays into the home of Maya,

And engaged in Lust, it stays not.

Utter thou then the Lord's Name, O man, with thy tongue, with all thy heart, [3]

Elephants, horses, gold, sons, and wife,

Of these one keeps immense care, and so loses the battle of life.

It is a gamble, and one’s life is wasted away. [4]

One gathers riches and with this increases Evil (in the mind),

And pain and pleasure stand ever at our gate, Py :

Peace and Equipoise are when one Dwells on the Lord. [5 3

When He, the Lord, is in Mercy, He Unites us with Himself, a)

And one gathers Merit and burns one’s demerits through the Word. 3

And so, through the Guru, Attains to the Precious Name. [6] 8
. 5)

Gurv-Cranth Sahib 999999292999992999999999999999999999032999990090"
Page 262 

7
Without the Lord's Name, all abide in Pain,

(Like) the egocentric (who) is Attuned to Maya :

(But) they, in whose Lot is it so Writ by God, Receive Wisdom through the Guru. = [7/ a
The mind is mercurial : it wanders all the time :

But the True and the Pure One loves not the soiled (mind).

Nanak : through the Guru, does one Dwell upon the Praise of the Lord. [8-3]

Gauri Guareri M, 1

In Ego, there is no Peace,

False is the way of the self ; True only is He the Lord.

They, who loved Duality, wasted away their lives,

(But), one does only what is in his Eternal Writ. [J/

Such a (reckless) Gamble have I found in the world

That men ask for pleasures, and forget the Lord’s Name. [J-Pause]

If the Unseen be Seen, only then can one Him describe,

But being seen not, vain is all talk (about the Lord).

Through the Guru, He is Seen, the natural way,

And one Attunes one’s Mind to His Service, yea, to Him alone. [2

One asks for pleasure and immense pain,

And weaves (thus) a garland of Sins.

Without the*One, all else is false ; (without Him), there is no Deliverance.

He the One is the Creator, who Creates and Watches all. /3/

The Fite of Desire is quenched with the Word,

Which washes off the sense of Duality, the natural way.

And, through the Guru's Instruction, one Enshrines the Lord's Name in one’s heart,
And, through the True Word, one Sings His,Praise. /4/

He, who, through the Guru's Grace, is in Love (with the Lord),

Within him Abides He, the True One.

Without the Lord’s Name, one reaches not the Self,

He, the Lord of Love, leans on the Love (of His Devotees) :

And when He, the Lord, is in Grace, one Knows the (Essence of the) Name. [5]
The love of Maya (leads to) involvement :

The egocentric is impure ; and dreadful is he.

If one Serves the True Guru, his involvement is over.

And, through the Nectar-Name, one keeps company ever with Gladness. [6]
If one Knows (the Truth), one is Attuned to the One alone,

And one abides in the Self, and Merges in Truth,

And cease one’s comings and goings.

This is the Wisdom one receives from the Perfect Guru. {7

Say what one will of Him but one can say not all there is to say. P, 223
Task the Guru (and he says) there is no other Door but God's.

All pain, all pleasure, are in His Will,

And, so says (also) Nanak, the lowly, Attuned to the Lord, /8-4/

Gauri M. 1

In the world’s mind is Maya, and the sense of the Other.

(And s0), it is wasted away by Lust, Wrath and Ego. [J]
Whom shall I call the other, when there is no one other than the Lord ?
He, the Immaculate One, Pervades all, allover, {J-Pause/

Ti is the Evil mind that speaks of the Other,

And thus comes and goes, thinking (ever) of Duality. /2]

I see not the Other, over the earth or the skies,

Nor in man, nor in woman, nor in any other beings. /3/

I see the light of the lamps, the sun and the moon,

And, within them all, ] See my ever-young Spouse. /4/

By His Grace, the True Guru Attuned me to the Lord,

And I Realised in my mind the One alone. [5]

Through the Guru, I knew the One, Immaculate Lord,

And stilling my Duality I Realised Him, through the Word. [6/

2392390 Guru-Granth Sabib

Page 26
uh

BBAUSESESECOSSOSEHSLE GOCCESEESOPEEECESCET COLE PO SSOCEOCEEOESEHOSTSSEHCCOCOSESEGBCEGEECLE

In the Will of the One alone works the whole world,

For, of the One alone all Creation is born. [7]

‘The ways are two, but the Lord (of both) is one :

(O man), Realise this through His Will, through the Word, /&/
He, who Pervades all forms, all colours, all minds,

Dwell thou, Nanak, on Ais Praise alone, [9-5]

Gauri M, 1

He, who does works of the Soul, alone is True:

The False one knows not the Way to Deliverance. [1

The Yogi is he who thinks of the Way

To slay the Five (Demons) and to enshrine the Truth within. /J-Pause]

He, in whom abides the Truth,

Alone values the True Way to Yoga. [2] .

To him the moon and the sun are alike ; as are the home and the woods :

In the Praise (of the Lord) is to him the way of works,

He Dwells on the Word and asks for nothing but the one Name (of the Lord).
All wisdom, all meditation, all ways (of religion) are for him to awaken to Truth. [4]
He is ‘absorbed in the (Lord's) Fear and he goes not away (from it).

And, He, who is Attuned to the Lord, who can put value (on him)? /3/

He, the Lord Himself, Unites us with Himself, stilling all our Doubts,

And, by the Guru's Grace, one attains to the highest State (of Equipoise). (6/
The Guru's Service is to Dwell upon the Word!

To still one’s Ego and to do Pure deeds, [7/

All meditation, all austerities and the reading of the Puranas,

Is in Believing in the Lord, who is beyond the Beyond. 8-6]

Gauri M. 1

He, who practises forgiveness, this for him is the keeping of the fast, good conduct and contentment :
Him touches not Ailment, nor the Pain of the Yena.

And he is Emancipated, (and Merges in) the Lord, the Formless One, without sign, [J]
What fear has then the Yogi,

When the Lord is in the woods as at home, within (us) as much as without. [J-Pause/
The fearless Yogi Dwells on the Lord, the Immaculate, .

And, he keeps Awake in mind, day and night, Attuned to the (Lord's) Truth.

Such a Yogi pleases my heart. /{2/

The snares (of Maya) and death, he burns with the Lord's Fire,

He slays age, death and the way of Ego.

He himself Swims across and Saves even this ancestors, /3/

The Yogi 1s he who Serves the True Guru.

He, who is Imbued with the Lord's Fear, becomes fearless,

For, one becomes the like of one one Serves. /4/] P, 224
He, the Man, is Immaculate, Fearless and All-pervading,

He makes the supportless the support of all : Sacrifice am I unto Him.

I Sing His Praise (that) | may not be born again (to die), /5/

He, who Sees the One alone, within and without,

And, through the Guru's Word, Realises his Self,

He, at the Lord's Door, is Approved, through the True Word. /6/

He, who Merges in the Word, abides in his Self,

He comes not, nor goes, and his desire is stilled.

Through the Guru's Word, flowers the Lotus (of his mind). 7]

All that seems is gripped by Hope or Despair,

Or Lust, or Anger, or Maya, or Hunger or Thirst, ,

Nanak : rare is the one who rises above these. /&-7]

1. qa al Aw nee lag (qe #1 Har Tay are) : This amply supports the thesis propounded in the introduction
that th: Guru's Service implies agthing more thia coatemalatioa of ths Word, as cogtemplation is to flow out of one's selr,

Gurv-Granth Salih 9999999999999929999999999999999999999080792
Page 26

Gauri M, 1

I seek to meet the Lord's Servant who brings me Peace,

And makes me shed all my Sorrows and Attain Truth. {7/

Seeing whom, my mind may become whole,

And the Dust of whose Feet gets me the Merit of bathing in all the holy waters. [J-Pawse/
Whose mind is Attuned to the Lord and whose cycs are content,

And whose tongue is Pure, for it Tastes the Lord's Pure Essence. [2/

Whose doings are True and within his heart who Serves (the Lord),

And whose mind is filled with the Unfathomable, Unknowable God. [3/

I See the Lord wheresoever I See,

But the false world fights without Knowing (the Truth). /4/

When the Guru Instructs, one’s mind is Awakened,

But, rare is the one who, through the Guru, Knows. /5/

Be Thou in Grace and keep me (whole), O Thou Beneficent Lord,

For, without Knowing (Thee), our minds run wild. /6/

The Guru has proclaimed : “There is not another”,

So who else shall ] See’? Who else shall I Worship? [?7/

The Lord has Created the three worlds for the Saint's sake,

But he (alone) who Examines his Self, Knows the Quintessence. [8]

He, who Enshrines the Truth in his heart, and who abides in the True Love (of the Lord),
Of him Nanak is a Slave, [9-8]

Gauri M. 1

When) Brahma indulged in Ego, he knew not (the end),
ut when the pain of (the loss of ) the Vedas did (his memory) suffer, he writhed in remorse,
He, who Dwells on the Lord, alone has Belief in his mind. /{J/
The evil of Ego grips the whole world,
But it goes from him who meets with the Guru. //—Pause/
The King Bali had the pride of possessions,
And he performed the Yajnas, inflated with Ego.
(But), bereft of the Guru’s Manrram, he was condemned to the underworld. [2]
Harishchandra gave away all in charity and was honoured and famed,
But, bereft of the Guru, he knew not the Mystery of the Mysterious (Lord).
The Lord leads us astray Himself ; Himself He brings us back to the Path, 3]
Hiranyakashipu of evil mind committed evil deeds :
The Lord in the form of Man-lion, slayed his Ego,
And saved Prehlada (the Devotee of God) by His Grace. [4]
Ravana forgot himself, he the dud, unconscious (of himself),
And his Lanka was robbed, and he lost also his head.
His Ego destroyed him, without the Guru’s Love, 3]
The thousand-armed (Arjuna), the demons (Madhu and Ketab) and, also Mahishesura,
And Hiranyakashipu too, who was torn by the nails of the Lord's Hands ;
Yea, all these were slain, without the Worship of the Lord. /6/ — .
The demons Jarasindha, Kaljamana, Rakatbija and Kalnema were slain too ;
And, slaying the demons, the Lord (Krishna) saved the Saints, [7]
He, the Lord, as the True Guru, Dwells on the Word :
And overpowers the Demon of Duality within us, P, 225
They, who turn God-wards, are Saved, (fdr), they Worship the (Lord’s) Tiuth. [8]
Duryodhana (the King) lost his honour, sunk (in Ego),
For, he Knew not the Lord, the Creator.
He, who pains the Devotees of the Lord, he for sure is wasted away. [9/
Janmeja, the King, Realised not the Guru's Word:
How then could he find Peace, lured by Doubt ?
If one forgets (the Lord) even for a moment, he comes to Grief. [10]
King Kansa and his warriors, Kesi and Chandoor, had no equal ;
But they Knew not the Lord and so were Dishonoured,
Without the Lord of the universe, no one comes to one's aid, {//]
Without the Guru, one sheds not one's pride :
Through the Guru's Wisdom one attains Faith, Contentment and the Lord’s Name : :
Nanak (too) Realised the (Essence of the) Lord’s Name by Dwelling on the Lord's Praise, {2-97

IPIDIIIDOVI9203200 Guru-Granth Salib

Page 26
Gauri M, 1

If one applies scent to the body,

And wears all over the silken robes ;

Without the Lord, where is Peace for him? [J/

Why display thy (fine) wear ?

For, where is Peace for thee without the Lord of the Universe? /J-Pause]
Round one’s ears are the curls (of hair),

And round his neck the garlands of pearls,

And decked is his mattress with the red Lalla-flowers,

(But), where can he find Peace without the Lord? /2/

Of beauteous eyes may one’s wife be

Bedecked with sixteen kinds of Embellishments,

(But), without Dwelling on the Lord, all this goes waste. [3]
Abide one may in a palace and comfort-giving may one *s couch be
And the gardener may spread flowers al] over one’s bed :

(But), Without the Lord's Name, one’s body isin Pain. [4]

The race-horses, elephants, standards and bands,

And armies, and royal assistants and many other facades,

All these, without the Lord, are an empty show. /3/

Call one may oneself an adept all miracles are in whose power :
And cap his head with a crown, with a canopy waving overhead,
But, where can he find the Truth, without the Lord? /6/

One may be a chief or a king,

And have command over the slaves, but all this is a vain show.
For, without the Guru’s Word, one’s Works are Accomplished not. [7/
Ego and Attachment one sheds through the Guru's Word.
Through the Guru's Way, one’s heart Knows the Lord.

Prays Nanak : “O Lord, I seek Thy Refuge”. [8-J0]

Gauri M. 1

(The Lord's Devotee) Serves the One alone, and he Knows not another :

He forsakes the world’s evils ; bitter to him they taste.

And, through Love, he Merges in (the Lord’s) Truth. [J/

Such is the Devotee of the Lord,

Who Washes his Dirt off by Dwelling on the Lord's Praise, [J-Pause]

The (mind"s) ‘lotus’ of the whole world is inverted :

And it smoulders in the fire of Evil intent.

He alone is Saved who Dwells on the Guru’s Word, [2]

The black-bee, the moth, the elephant, the fish,

And the deer, all suffer but for their own deeds,

They are lured by Desire and know not the Quintessence (of Reality), [3]

The lover of a woman is lured by lust,

And anger destroys all the evil ones,

And, forgetting the (Lord's) Name, they lose Good sense and Honour. [4]

The Egocentric is lured by another's wife, P. 226
Round his neck is (thus) the noose, and he engages himself in Strife ;

But he who turns God-wards is Emancipated, by Singing the Lord's Praise. [35]

The widow offers her body to another ;

For the sake of lust or money, her mind is swayed thus :

(But), without the spouse, she is satiated not. /6/

One reads the text of the Smritis,

And hears and studies the Vedas and the Puranas, to hold his mind,

(But), being Imbued not with the Essence (of Reality), his mind wanders in a myriad ways, [7]

As the Chatrik thirsts for the Svanti-drop of love,
As the fish is joyed by being in water, a
(So) is Nanak sated (only) with the Essence of the Lord. /8-J 1]

Page 26
{ 218 ]
Gauri M. 1

He who tortures his body to wither away is Approved not by the Lord,

Nor he who changes many robes, or applies dust to his limbs.

He who forsakes the (Lord's) Name, grieves in the end, [J]

But, he who Believes in the Dear Lord attains Peace.

Forgetting the (Lord's) Name, one suffers the pain of death (again and over again). {J-Pause]
The scent of Chandan, and aloes-wood and camphor,

And the intoxication or Maya remove one far from the State (of Bliss),

If one forgets the (Lord's) Name, (then) all else is vain. [2]

The standards and the bands and the salutations to one's throne,

All accentuate Desire, and one is lured by Lust.

Without seeking the Lord, one can neither Worship nor Receive the (Lord's) Name. /3/
In strife and Ego, one Attains not the Lord.

(But), if one gives away his mind (to God), he Receives the Blissful Name.

In Duality is Ignorance which leads to Pain. 4]

Can one buy wares (without money) ?

Can one ferry across the sea without the boat ?

So does one need the Guru,

Without whom one loses ever and forever. [5]

Greetings to him who shows the Path.

Greetings to him who Recites to me the Word :

Greetings to him who Unites me with the Lord. [6]

Greetings to him who is the Life of my life.

Chanting the Guru’s Word, I Drink in the Lord's Nectar,

And, by His Will, the Lord Blesses me with the Glory of His Name. [7]

How shall I live without the Lord's Name, O mother ?

Night and day, I shall Dwell on the Lord, and seek His Refuge ;

For, Imbucd with the Lord's Name, Nanak, we Receive Honour (at His Court), /8-12]

Gauri M.1

In Ego, we know not the Lord, whatever the garb we wear.
(But), rare is the one who, through the Guru's Word, Worships the Lord and Believes. [J]
Engrossed by I-amness, we attain not Truth,
Gu) when Ego departs, we attain the highest State (of Bliss). {J-Pause
n Ego do monarchs’ minds wander far ;
In Ego, they are wasted away and are born to die (again). /2/
If one Dwells on the Guru’s Word, one’s Ego is overcome :
And one holds one’s mercurial mind, and slays the Five (Demons). /{3/
If the Truth be within one, one enters the Abode of Equipoise ;
And by knowing the (True) King, one attains the highest State. [4]
Truthful becomes his conduct ; his Doubt is cast away by the Guru,
And he concentrates ever on the Fearless (Lord), {5
What does a man achieve, dying in Ego ?
But, if he meets with the Perfect Guru, he rids himself of all embroilments. 6]
All that seems, is not what it seems.
This is the Wisdom one Receives from the Guru and so Sings the Praises (of the Lord). {7) FP. 227
Ego leads us to Bondage and so we wander. ,
But, Nanak, in the Worship of the Lord is all Peace, [8-13]

Gauri M. 1

Firstly, Brahma himself is subject to death.

He entered into the lotus and searched al] the underworlds, but found not (the limits of the Lord).
He submitted not to the Lord’s Will and was thus lured away by Doubt. | J)

All that flowers, dies in the end :

(But), | was Saved, for I Dwelt on the Guru's Word. /J-Pawse]

All gods and goddesses are lured away by Maya,

And, Death is over their heads, without the Service of the Guru,

He, the Lord alone, is Immortal ; He, the Unknowable, Unknown. [2]

Page 267 . www,sikhbookclub.com
The kings and chiefs will remain not,
* Forsaking the Lord’s Name, they suffer the Yama's Pain.
My Mainstay is the (Lord's) Name : I abide as the Lord Wills. [3]
Neither kings, nor chiefs, stay for ever,
And the rich too die, gathering money and more money.
Give me, O Lord, the (True) Riches of Thy Nectar-Name. [4]
The subjects and the chiefs, the lords and the leaders,
Seem but mortal to me they all.
And Death, the inevitable, strikes at the head of the false, [5]
He the Lord is Eternal, He is the only True Being :
He, who Created all, (also) Destroys all,
When He, the Lord, is known through the Guru, one attains Honour (at the Lord's Court). [6]
The Qazis, the Sheikns, and those in the garb of a fagir,
Call themselves great ; but they suffer the pangs of Ego.
And Death dogs them ever, without the support of the Guru. [7/
Death traps us through our eves and the tongues,
And what poisonous talk we bear through the ears.
(For), without the Word, we are beguiled, night and day. [&/
lf Truth be in our heart, and we Dwell on the Lord,
The Yama eyes us not and we Sing ever (the Lord's) Praise :
And, Nanak, through the Guru, we Merge in the Word, [9-J/4)

Gauri M. 1

eA
a
a
t)
ff)
)
a
€)
5)
He who speaks the Truth and is never false, 8
And, by the Guru's Grace, goes as the Lord's Will ;
And seeks the True Refuge and remains detached ; [1] 3
(And) Abides in the Abode of Truth : him Death touches not. ;
(But) the egocentric comes and goes and is ever in Pain. /J-—Pause] : oo, Te 3
Drink thou the (Lord's) Nectar and Utter what is Unutterable,
And Abide in thy Self, and Attain Equipoise.
And be thou Imbued with the Lord’ 5. Essence ; This forsooth is Peace. [2] .
_ If one walks on the Guru’s Way, one’s mind is heid,
And, through the Guru's Wisdom, one abides in Truth and Equipoise and Sings (ever) of the Lord :
And Drinks the Lord's Nectar'and Churns up the (Lord’s) Essence.
When one Meets the True Guru, and receives his Instruction,
One surrenders to Him one’s body and mind and Examines one’s Self.
One searches one’s self and finds the limits thereof. /4/
The Lord's Immaculate Name is the Pure Food.
Which the Devotees, swan-like, Taste and Sce the Infinite Light of Truth.
And (then) wherever they See, they See the One, the Absolute Lord, -/3]
The Lord remains Detached : He Does only what is True,
If one Serves at the Guru's Feet, one Attains the highest State (of Bliss).
And the mind is satiated by the Mind (itself), and one wanders not thereafter, nor is in Fgo. [6]
Who, O who has not been Saved. thus ? : :
The Lord's Praise has Emancipated all. P, 228
And when one Meets with the Lord, one searches not for another. /7/
In the True Abode (of Self}, Revealed by the Guru, I knew the Unknowable.
Eternal is this Abode, not a mere delusion of Maya.
Through Truth, one gets Contentment—and one’s Doubt is cast away. [8]
He, in whose mind i is the Lord, is True ;
(But), his company is Attained through ‘the Guru:
And, Nanak, one Washes one’s Dirt off through the True Name. /[9-J5]
3
3
*)

Gauri M. 1

He, whose mind is Imbued with the Lord’s Name,
See thou his Sight at early dawn. [J] .
He who Dwells not on the Lord, is unrartunate : : :
For, our Lord is Beneficent, for ever, and at all times. {J-Pause] ie

Guru-Granth sakib 9999999900000920909222990999999999929232999900:
Page 268 www. sikhbookolub. com
{ 220 ]

The Perfect man, who Dwells on the Lord, through the Guru's Word,

In his heart Rings the Music of the Unstruck Melody, /2]

He, who Loves the Lord, through Worship of Him,

Him the Lord keeps whole by His Mercy, [3

He, in whose heart is the One Lord,

Seeing him, one's mind is ever in Bliss, [4]

He, the Lord, Pervades all,

The self-willed Egocentric (knows not, and so) wanders through myriads of births. (57
He alone Knows (the Real) who Attains to the True Guru,

And, stilling his Ego, Receives the Guru's Word. /¢6/

How can one Know of the Union of the Above with the Below ?

If, through the Guru, is one United with the Lord, one (Knows and Believes), [7/

We are Sinners, O Lord, without Merit,

What Merit can bring us near unto Thee ?

Nanak ; only when the Lord is in Mercy (do we Attain to the Lord), and are Emancipated. /8-J6]

Gauri Bairaigan M. 1

By the Grace of the ®ne Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Enlightener.

As the herdsman tends the cows, so does the Lord care for us.

He tends us night and day and bestows upon us His Soul-ful Peace. [1]

Protect me here and Hereafter, O Thou Beneficent Lord of the poor,

Thy Refuge I seek, O Thou, who Blessest all with Thy Grace. /J-Pause/

Wherever I See I find Thee, Protect me (then), O Thou, the Protector of all,

Thou art the Life of my life ; the Giver and the Expender. [2]

Without Dwelling on Wisdom, one does the set deeds, and wanders below and above,

But one’s Darkness is dispelled not without the Lord's Praise, [3]

I’ve seen the world destroyed by Avarice and Ego :

Through the Service of the Guru, one finds the Lord and the True Door of Salvation. [4]

The Transcendent Lord Abides in the Self.

Without the Word, nothing stays, knowing (it), man is in Bliss. /3J

What has he brought in, what can he take out, (why) is he gripped by the Yarma's Noose ?

He's like the pot tied to a string and goes in and comes out (of the well) of the skies and the under-
worlds. /6/

If one forgets not the Guru-given Name, one attains Honour, the natural way.

Within us is the Treasure of the Word : finding it, we shed our self. /7/

If the Lord be in Mercy, one is Attuned to Virtue,

(And) this Union, Nanak, then breaks not, and one reaps the Fruit of Truth, (8-J-J7/ P. 229

Gauri M. 1

If we Know (the Truth), through the Guru, our Strife is ended.
(Then) He, the Lord, who Pervades every heart, is our Master. [J
Without the Guru’s Word, we are Emancipated not, deliberate one may upon this and see,
Practise as many (good) deeds as we may,
Without the Guru, our Darkness Vanishes not, [{J-Pause]
The blind of mind, what may one say to them ?
Without the Guru, one Sees not the Path ; how is then oné to doit alone? /2/ ‘
One calls the false one true but the Essence of Truth one knows not,
Wonderful is this age, wherein the Blind one is the seer'! /3/
Those in Sleep are called Awake ; and those Awake as if in Sleep ;
And the Living are called Dead, (but) the (one truly) Dead is mourned not! /4/
He, who Comes is seen as Going, and he who Goes as Coming:
That what belongs to the other one owns as his own ; and his own he likes not abit! [3]
He calls the Sweet bitter, and the Bitter sweet :
And slanders the one Imbued (with the Lord) : such is the way of this Dark age! /6/
He serves the Maid, and sees not the Master :
(But) if one churns a puddle, it will not yield him butter. {7}
He, who Knows the meaning of this verse is my Guru
Nanak : he, who Knows himself, (Merges in) the Infinite, {8}

Page 26
The Lord Himself Does all ; He Himself strays us (from the Path),
And, through the Guru we know this that the Lord Pervades all. /{9-2-J8/

Rag Gauri Guareri M. 3
Ashtapadis

ip the Grace of the Gne Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Rnlightener.

The mind is contaminated by Duality :
And, strayed by Doubt, one comes and goes. [J]
Of the egocentric, the contamination goes not,
Till is Imbued with the Lord's Name, through the Word. /[JI-Pause/
All that seems is contaminated by Attachment,
And (so) one is born to die, again and again. [2]
Contaminated are fire, air, and water ;
And our food too, and all else that we eat. [3]
Contaminated are our actions too, for we Worship not (the Lord).
Imbued with the Lord's Name is the mind Purified, [4]
Serving the True Guru, the contamination goes,
And then one Dies not, nor is one re-born, [S/
Look thou into the Shastras or the Smiritis ;
Without the Lord's Name, Emancipation is attained not. [6]
‘In the four ages, the highest thing is the Lord’s Name, and Deliberation on the Word,
In the Kali age too, only the Wise-in-God are Saved. [7/
The True One dies not, nor comes nor goes.
Says Nanak : “ By the Guru’s Grace, one Merges in the Lord”, /8-J]

Gauri M, 3

The Lord’s Service is the Mainstay of a holy life :

Keep then thou the Lord in thy heart's abode.

He, who turns God-wards, has Glory at the True Gate. [J]

© Pundit, read thou of thy Lord, the God, and shed thy Vice.

And, through the Guru, Swim across (the Sea of Existence). [1-Pause] P. 230
Through the Guru’s Grace, Ego departs from within (thee).

Through the Guru's Grace, thy mind is Soiled not.

Through the Guru's Grace, the Name Abides in thy mind. [2J
Through the Guru's Grace, Truth is our Aarma, our Religion.

Through the Guru's Grace, are stilled our Ego and Duality.

Through the Guru’s Grace, one is Imbued with the (Lord’s) Name. [3]
First, make thy mind Wise and (so) Know thy Lord ;

For, if one instructs others, they hear not.

He who Knows through the Guru, is ever at Peace. [4

The Egocentric is over-clever and puts up a false show :

But whatever he Earns is Approved not (by the Lord) ;

And he comes and goes and has no Rest. [5]

The Egocentric Works ever in Ego

And like the heron, fixes his mind (on the hunt) ;

And is gripped by the Yama and he regrets and grieves. (6)

Without Serving the Guru, one is Emancipated not :

Through the Guru's Grace, i is the Lord Attained.

(For), the Guru is Beneficent through all the four Ages.

He, who turns Ged-wards, finds his honour and caste in the Glory of the (Lord's) Name.
And by him, May4, the ‘daughter’ of the seat, is slain,

Nanak : false is all cleverness without the (Lord's) Name. [8-2]

Gauri M. 3

Know thou the Religion of this age,
— Through the Perfect Guru is it revealed—
That the Lord’s Name is our company both here and Hereafter. [1/

1. According to a Paurdnic tale, when the ocean was churned by the angles, M4y4 appeared among fourteen
jewels obtained in this. process.

Guru-Grach Subib 99999929899999990999999999999999999900209999900904

SUSESCEVORE OEE

Page 27
[ 222 ]

Read thou of the Lord, Dwell thou on Him in the mind,
That, through the Guru's Grace, the dirt (of thy mind) departs. {J-—Pause}
Through contention and strife He's found not,

So, through the Guru's Word, Attune thyself to the Lord's Truth. /2/
The world is Soiled, lured by Ego,

One may bathe oneself in the holy waters, (but) one's Ego goes not.
Without meeting the Guru, the Fama wastes us away. [3

He the one is True, who stills his Ego ;

And, through the Guru's Word, slays the Five (Demons).

He Saves himself and Saves his whole generation. [4/

The Wizard has put up (before us) the show of May4,

And the Blind egocentrics grab it (as real) ;

(But) they, who turn God-wards remain Detached being Attuned to the Lord. [5]
Often enough some change their garbs,

But within them is Desire, and they walk in Ego :

And they know not their Self, and so lose the Game (of life). [6]
Some feel clever by their mere garbs,

But by the love of M4y4 are they lured and strayed by Doubt;

And, without Serving the Guru, they suffer immense Pain, {7/]

They, who are Imbued with the (Lord's) Name, are ever Detached,
They keep the household, but are Attuned to Truth,

Nanak : Fortunate are they, Who Serve the True Guru. [8-3]

And thy mind and body are valueless, if torn by Duality.
6)
tt
6)
6)
e)
a)
i
g)
e)

Gauri M. 3

Brahma was the first to Dwell upon the teachings of the Vedas,

But from him issued forth the gods lured by Desire ;

They wander within the three Modes and Abide not in the Self. [JJ

I was Saved by the Lord, for, He led me on to the Guru,

Who made me Wise in the Worship of the Lord’s Name. /J-Pauwse]

The Word of Brahma involves one with the three Modes,

For, they, who read of the strife (of gods therein), over their heads hangs Death. P, 231
They find not the Quintessence (of Reality), and gather the load of chaff. [2]
The Egocentric is led astray by his Ignorance:

He forgets the Lord’s Name and does other deeds.

He is Drowned in the Sea of Matter, lured away by Duality, /3]

He, who's crazy for Maya, calls himself a Pundit,

His mind is filled with Poison and so he suffers Sorrow,

Round his neck is the Yama's Noose and Death ever keeps him in Pain. [4]
By the Guru's Grace the Yama comes not neat us ;

And, His Word burns our Ego and the sense of Duality.

And, Imbued with the Lord’s Name, we Sing ever the Lord’s Praise. [5]
Maya is the obedient slave of the Lord's Devotees :

He, who takes to their Feet, Mounts to the Lord's Mansion,

poyhe

7 Ae

SOGECHS

And is ever-Pure and Merges in Equipoise. /6/ f
He, who Hears the Lord’s Gospel, is the only Rich in the world. *
All make obeisance to him and he is Worshipped for ever, :

For, he Dwells on the Virtues of the True Lord in his Mind [7] a ot

The Perfect Guru has uttered the Word,
(Through which) one overcomes the three Modes and is Attuned to the fourth State (of Bliss).
And, Nanak, stilling one’s Ego, one is Merged in the Supreme Being. /8-¢]

Gauri M, 3

. =

Brahma reads the Vedas, but dweis in Strife.

Within him is the fire (of Desire), and he Knows not his Self.

(For), He'd Attain to the Lord if he Lwslt on the Guru's Word. [J/

If one Serves the Guru, Death takes not hi. wi;

(But), the egocentrics are wasted away by Duality. [/-Pause] “

9 GESHOSESSSSSOOOOLESOOSCLES

Page 27
Through the Guru are the Sinners Purified,

Through the Guru's Word is one drawn to Equipoise ;

Yea, one is Purified (only) by the Guru's Word and one Attains tothe Lord. [2)

The Lord Himself Unites us with the True Guru,

And then the Lord is Pleased with us.

And then we Sing the Lord's Praise, the natural way. [3/

Without the True Guru, we are lured away by Doubt.

(Bul), the egocentrics are Blind ; they lick ever the Poison (of Maya).

So, they suffer the Yama's Rod and are ever in Sorrow. [4]

If one seeks the Refuge of the Lord, the Yama eyes one not,

And stilling one’s Ego, one is. Attuned to the (Lord's) Truth.

Yea, for evet is such a one Attuned to the Lord. /3/

They, who Serve the True Guru, are Pure :

For, their mind is Attuned to the (Guru's) Mind, and they conquer (thus) the whole world,
Thus is (True) happiness attained, O my friend! /6/

He, ‘who Serves the True Guru, makes Fruitful his life.

In his heart Abides the (Lord's) Name and his Ego departs from within.

And ‘the Unstruck Music of the Word Rings in hisMind [7]

Who) O who was not Purified by the True Guru ? .

Nanak : The Devotees were Purified through the Lord’s Worship and attained Glory at the Lord's Gate,

Glory,\glory be to the Lord’s Name. [8-5/

Gauri M, 3

If one is swayed! by the three Modes, one’s Doubt goes not,

Nor breaks\one’s Bondage, nor is one Emancipated.

In the Kali age, the Deliverer is only the True Guru. [J]

Through the Guru, man’s Doubt is dispelled.

And he is Attuned to the Lord ; and (within him) Rings the Music of Equipoise, [ I-Pause/
They, who abide in the three Modes, over their heads is Death. P, 232
(For), they Remember not the Name of the Creator-Lord,

And they are born to die, again and over again. {2/

Can the Blind teacher dispel one’s Doubt,

If one forgets the Source (of all life) and clings to Duality ?

One, who is infected by the Poison (of M4y4), is absorbed in it (inthe end). /3/]
Believing Maya to be the source, men ate swayed by Doubt ;

And, in Duality, they forsake the Lord,

(But), he on whom is the Lord's Grace, attains to the highest State (of Bliss), [4
He, within whom is Truth, spreads Truth without too.

The Truth is not hid, even if one keeps it hid.

And the man of Wisdom knows this, the natural way. /3/

Through the Guru am I Attuned to the (Lord’s) Truth.

And, through the Word, are my Ego and love of Maya destroyed,

And my True Lord has Untied me with Himself. /6/

The True Guru, the Beneficent, Recites the Word,

Which holds the wander-lust of my mind.

This is the Wisdom I Receive trom the Perfect Guru. {7/

He the Creator Creates, and then Creating, Destroys.

No other there is without Him, the Lord.

Nanak : through the Guru is this Truth Realised. [8-6]

Gauri M. 3

One Receives the (Lord's) Priceless Name through the Guru,

Through the Name one Serves ; through the Name one Merges (in Gad).

And, one’s Mind Sings ever the Nectar-Name.

(But), he, (alone) on whom is the Lord's Grace Tastes the Taste of Lord. {J}
He who Dwells in the heart on the Lord of the universe,

Attains to the highest State of Bliss, through the Guru's Grace. //-Pause/

1, Lit. describes, dilates upon.

Guru-Gramth Sabih 99999999009999299999990909999999999090229999900904

BSSGlCSCVSSSGsGaces

Page 272 . so. 
His heart is then Ulumined and is in Joy.

And, through the Guru's Grace, he Sings of the True One, the Treasure of Good.
And becomes the Slave of his Slaves,

And remains Detached in his very Home. /{2/

Rare is the Wise-in-God who is Emancipated in life.

He attains to the Supreme State (of Bliss)

And overcomes he the Three Modes and becomes Pure.

Yea, the Lord is Attained imperceptibly, through Truth, /3/

One rises above the love of one’s family and kindreds,

When the True One Abides in one’s heart.

And, through the Guru's Grace, is one’s mind pierced through, and is held.
He, who Realises the Lord's Will, is the only True being. [4]

Thou art the Creator, there is none other, O Lord !

Thee I Serve, for, from Thee is all Honour.

If Thou art in Mercy, I Sing of Thee.

The Jewel of Thy Name [lumines the whole universe. [5/

To the one Wise-in-God, the Word Tastes Sweet.

His Self flowers, and for ever is he Attuned to the Lord.

Imperceptibly then, through the Lord’s Grace, is the Truth Attained :
And one meets with the True Guru, by great, good Fortune, /6/
When the Lord’s Name, the Treasure of Good, the heart treasures,
One's Ego and Mine-ness and Evil and Sorrow depart.

When the Lord is Praised, Awakens the mind of the Gurmukh' ;

Yea, when the heart treasures the Lotus-Feet of the Lord. {7/

O God, he, whom Thou Blessest with Thy Name, it he alone Receives :
And one loses one’s Ego and Unites (with Thee) by the Guru’s Grace,
And one treasures Thy True Name in the heart.

And then, one Merges in Thy Truth, the natural way, /8-7]

Gauri M, 3

Through the Lord's Fear, the mind is by itself made whole, the natural way,

And the mind is Imbued with the Word and Attuned to the Lord : P. 233
And one Abides in one’s Self, as is the Lord’s Will. {J/

Serving the True Guru, one’s Ego departs :

And one Altains to Govind, the Treasure of Good, /[/-Pause]

The mind is detached (from Maya) when, through the Word, it Fears the Lord,

My Lord, the Immaculate, Pervades all :

(But) it is by the Guru's Grace that one is United with Him. /2]

When one becomes the Slave of the Lord's Slaves, one Attains Peace.

Thus is my Lord, the God, Attarned.

And, by the Lord's Grace one Sings the Lord's Praise, [3]

Accursed is the Life which Loves not the (Lord's) Name :

Accursed is the comfortable couch which Jures one to the darkness of lust for a woman.
(But), Blessed is the life of one who leans on the (Lord's) Name. [4

Accursed the family, the clan, which Loves not the Lord.

He alone is my friend, who Sings the Lord’s Praise,

Without the Lord’s Name, I have no other (Support). [3]

By the True Guru, I was Blest with Honour and Deliverance.

And I Dweli on the Lord’s Name, and rid of all Sorrow :

And I was ever in Bliss, Attuned tothe Lord's Name, [6]

Wheno I met the Guru, I Knew my Self:

And the Fire of Ego and Desire within me was quenched.

I shed my Wrath aid took w T-mpassion. [7/

The Lord Himself, in His Mercy, Blesses us with his Name.

(But), rare is the one, who, through (he Guru, Receives this Jewel.

And one Sings the Praise of the Lord, th. Unknowable, the Mysterious God. [8-8]

1. Lit. He whose face is turned towards the Guru.
290 Guru-Granth Sahi
Rag Gauri Bairagan M. 3

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the ternal, the Enlightener.

They, who turn their face away from the True Guru, their countenances are evil.

Bound (to Desire), they suffer Pain, and get not the time again (to return to the Guru). [J]
Save Thou me, O Thou Beneficent Lord, '

And Unite me with Thy Saints that | Dwell on Thy Praise in my heart. [/-Pause]

The Lord is Pleased with the Devotees, whe walk in the Lord's Way.

And shedding their Ego, Serve the Lord and live, dying to the World, /2/

He, who has Blest us with the body and life, over our heads is His Command,

Why forsake Him, O mind, keep thou thy Lord ever in-thy heart, {3/

We're Honoured on Receiving the (Lord's) Name ; Believing, we are if Bliss.

(But), we Receive the Name through the True Guru. I
And, by the Lord's Grace, do we Attain unto the Lord. [4/ I

He, who turns his fate away from the Guru, wanders about ever in Doubt. .

Him the earth or the sky shelters not, and he is wasted away by his (mind's) Dirt. [5]

This world is luted by Doubt, drugged with the potion of Atiachniént.

(But), they, who met the True Guru, them Maya corrupted not. [6

They, who Serve the Guru, aré Beauteous ; they cast off their Dirt of Egs,

They are Imbued with the Word and are thus made Pure ;

And, they walk in the Way of the Guru. /7/ P. 734
The Lord, the Beneficent, the One alone, Forgives and, in His Mercy, Unites us with Himself.

Nanak, © Lord, seeks Thy Refuge : Deliver him of the Bondage as Thou Willest. [8-J-9-27]

Rag Gauri Poorbi M. 4, Karhale*

My the Grace of the @ne Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Hulightener.

O thou wandering mind, O my stranger-friend, how shalt thou Meet thy Lord, thy Mother,

Thou Attainest to Him by good Fortune, when thy Beloved Hugs thee to His Bosom, [J]

O my wandering mind, Dwell on the True Guru, the Purusha. [J+Pause]

O my wandering mind, O thou thinking thing, Dwell thou on the Lord’s Name,

So that wherever art thou to render thy Account, thou art Released by thy Lord. [2]

O thou wandering mind, © thou Pure one, to thee sticks the Dirt of Ego.

The Beloved is Manifest before thee, in thy very Home ; (but) Separated, thou sufferest Pain, [3]

O my wandering mind, my beloved, seek out thy Lord in thy heart,

Not by effort, but through the Guru, is He Seen, thy God, [4/

O my wandering mind, my beloved, Attune thyself to thy Lord, night and day,

And Attain to thy Home, the Castle of Love ; through the Guru is the Lord Met. /3/

O thou wandering mind, my friend, shed thy Avarice and thy make-believe.

For, the man of Avarice and make-believe is punished by the Yama. [6]

O thou wandering mind, my life, cleanse thou thyself of the Dirt of Doubt and sham.

And, through the Guru, Attain to the brimful Pool of Nectar,

And, in the Society of the Holy, Wash thy Dirt off. [7]

© thou wandering mind, my love, listen thou to the Wisdom of the Guru.

This lust for Maya that has enveloped (the whole world) avails thee not in the Yond. [&/

O my wandering mind, my friend, gather thou the Lord’s Name to Expend (on thy Journey into the Yond),
And attain thou to Glory thus.

Thou wouldst be Robed at the True Court, and the Lord will Hug thee to His Bosom. [9]

O my wandering mind, the Guru will Approve of thee
When thou, turned God-wards, dost the (godly) Deeds. |
Pray thou to the Guru, Nanak, that he may Unite thee with thy Lord. [0-1]

1, Karhala (Sindhi): Lit, a camel. Jt is also a folk-tune sung by the camel-drivers. These verses are to be sung
in the same strain, :

Page 27
O my wandering mind, © thou thinking thing, think thou of this, and in-gather (thy Lord),

O thou, who wanderest through the woods, see thou thy Lord through the Guru's Word in thy very
heart. ff]

O thou, my wandering mind, stick to the Guru-God, [ /-Pause]

O thou, my wandering mind, O thou thinking thing, the egocentrics are caught in the Noose (of the Yama),

(But), the one turned God-wards is Emancipated ; Gather thou then the Name of the Lord. [2]
© my wandering mind, O my love, seck thou the True Guru and the companionship of the Holy.
And, Dwell on thy Lord in the Society of the Saints,

For, the Lord goes along with thee (even in the Yond), [3/

O my wandering mind, O thou fortunate one, fix thy gaze on the One Lord alone ; P. 235
Only when He Wills, are we Emancipated :

Cherish then the Feet of the True Guru. [4

O my wandering mind, O my love, See thou the Light within thy body.

Through the Guru, one Sees the nine Treasures of the (Lord's) Name,

Yea, this is the Gilt of the Lord, the Beneficent. /3/

O my mercurial, wandering mind, shed thou thy hideous cleverness :

(And) in-gather the Lord's Name who Delivers thee in the end. [6/

O my wandering mind, O fortunate one, gather thou the Jewel of Wisdom.

And, hold in thy hand the sword of the Guru's Wisdom, which is the death of the Fama. {7}
O thou wandering mind, Dwell thou on thy inner Self.

Wandering without, thou art beguiled by Doubt.

When thou meetest thy Perfect Guru, the Purusha, thou findest thy Friend within thee. /&J

0 thou wandering mind, who art absorbed (in Maya),

Gather thou the Love of the Lord.

The Lord's Love goes not, if thou Servest the Guru by Dwelling on the Word. /9/

Thou art a Bird, O my wandering mind, the Immortal Lord is the Tree.

By great, good Fortune thou Perchest on Him, through the Guru's Grace.

O Nanak, treasure then thou the (Lord's) Name. 0-2-29))

Rag Gauri Guareri M. 5

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Rternal, the All-pervading,
the Qreutor, the Purusha, the Hulightener.

When man abides in Ego,

He wanders about, like mad, like stranger to himself,

(But), when he becomes the Dust for all to tread upon,

He Sees in all hearts the All-pervading Lord, [J /

Of Meekness this, then, ts the Fruit that one reclines in Bliss.
Yea, the True Guru alone Biesses one with this. /J-Pause]
When man looks upon another as evil,

Then the Net is cast for him by all.

When he sheds his ‘mine and thine’,

Then no one is his foe, nor any Separate from him. [2]
(But), when he clings to I-amness,

He falls into a great Trap.

(But), when he Realises the Creator of his life,

Then for him there is no Strife. (3)

When he is bound down by the love of self,

On him then Yama keeps his eye, and he comes and goes,
(But), when he casts off all his Doubts,

Then between him and the Transcendent Lord there is no Separateness. [4]
When he Believes in the distinctions of one thing and another,
He suffers Pain and Punishment and lives in Sorrow.

But when he Believes in the One alone,

Then, Sees he into the Essence of things. [5]

2290 Guru-Granth Subib

Page 27
When he craves for and runs after Maya,
He is satiated not, (for) his Desire stays.
But when he runs away from it,

Then the lotus-dwelling (Lakshmi) runs after him. /6]

When he finds his True Guru, by the Lord’s Grace,

Within his mind’s Temple burns the Light (of God).

(And) he knows what is (true) Victory, what Defeat, '

Then he knows the value of his (Mind’s) Home, [7] P, 236
He, the One, is the Creator and the Cause,

He, the All-wise, the Discriminating Intellect, ;

He's not far, too near is He ; He is with us (all the time). = -

Praise thou then, Nanak, with Love, the True One alone. fey

4

Gauri M. 5 i
Through the Guru's Service I am Dedicated to the (Lord's) Namie.
(But), he alone Receives it in whose Lot it is so Writ.
In his heart Dwells He the Lerd,
And his mind and body are comforted and stray no more, an
Praise thou thy Lord, O mind,
That thou may be Fulfilled both here and Hereafter: [J-—Pause]
Dwelling on whom, thy fear and strife depart,
And thy wandering mind is held.
Dwelling on Him, we suffer no Sorrow again,
And.Ego takes leave of us. [2]
Dwelling on Him, we overcome the Five Demons.
Dwelling on Him, we gather Nectar in our heart.
Dwelling on Him, our Desire is quenched.
Dwelling on Him, we are Approved at the Lord's Door. [3]
Dwelling on Him, myriads of our Sins are washed off.
Dwelling on Him, one becomes the Lord’s Saint.
Dwelling on Him, one’s mind is in cool comfort.
Dwelling on Him, all one's Dirt is cleansed. [4]
Dwelling on Him, one Attains to the Jewel of the Lord.
And leaves Him not thereafter, becoming accustomed to Him.
Dwelling on Him, one’s Abode is in Heaven,
Dwelling on Him, one Abides in Peace and Equipoise. {3/
Dwelling on Him, the fire (of Desire) touches us not.
Dwelling on Him, death takes not our toll.
Dwelling on Him, our Forehead shines in Purity.
Dwelling on Him, we shed all our Sorrow, [6/
Dwelling on Him, one lands in no trouble,
Dwelling on Him, one Hears the Celestial Music.
Dwelling on Him, Pure is one’s Repute.
Dwelling on Him, one’s Lotus is in Bloom, [7]
On all is the Guru's Eye of Grace,
Who Cherish in their hearts the Mantram of the Lord.
Nanak : their Food is the unbroken strain of the Lord's Praise,
Whose Guru is the Perfect Lord, [8-2]

Gauri M. 5

He, who Cherishes the Guru's Word in his heart,

And forsakes the company of the five (desires) ;

And the ten sense-organs who holds in control,

His Soul, forsure, is Illumined. [7]

(But), he alone is so dedicated and resolved,

On whom is the Lord’s Mercy and Grace. [J-Patse]
He, who looks alike on friend and foe,

And whatever he speaks is Wisdom Pure.

In all hearing, he Hears (only) the (Lord's) Name,

In all seeing, he Sees(the One alone). [2/

Guru-Gracth Sahib 990
Page 27
He sleeps in Poise and so rises he,

And, all that happens naturally, that, for him, has to happen,

In Poise he remains Detached and also Attached.

In Poise, he abides in Silence ; and so too doth he Utter (the Word), [3/
In Poise, he eats ; in Poise, he loves,

And, Separateness for him is gone, the natural way.

In Poisé he mects the Saints, the Lord's Own, ;

And through Poise, he views the Presence of the Transcendent Lord. [4]
He is in Poise at home, and so too when he renounces it, P. 237
And, the Duality of the mind forsakes he, the natural, way.

He, in whose mind is the Joy of such Equipaise,

He the one Meets with his Transcendent Lord. /3/

He, who Drinks the Nectar-Name, being in Poise,

Is Blest with the Blessing of an Awakened Soul, the natural way.

When his Soul is Imbued with the Gospel of Equipoise,

Within him (then) Abides the Eternal (Lord). [6

His mind is held the natural way,

And Rings within him the Unstruck Melody (of the Word).

And, the natural way, Tinkle the Bells within him,

And in his Home Abides the Transcendent Lord. /7/

He, in whose Lot it is to altain to Equipoise,
He Receives the Guru, the natural way, and the Religion of Truth,

He, who enjoys Equipoise, knows alone its Taste.

Nanak, the Lord’s Slave, is a Sacrifice unto him. /&-3/]

Gauri M. 5

Released from the abode of the womb,

One is related to the sons, the wife, the family.

One relishes many foods, wears many wears,

(But know thou) that these would forsure leave one in the end. [J
Which is the abode which goes not ? :

And which the Word that cleans our Evil mind? [/ Pause

The world of Indra is not above death, .

Nor the abode of Brahma, the god of gods,

And the world of Shiva will also perish,

And, all that is under the sway of the three-headed Maya,

Will pass away. [2]

The mountains, the woods, the earth, the vault of the sky, and the stars,
The sun, the moon, air, fire and water,

And day and night, and the fasting days and their distinctions,

And the Shastras and Smritis and also the Vedas, /3/]

And the holy places and the gods and the teraples and the books,

And the rosary and the saffron-mark and acts of ablution ;

And the loin-cloth, and the prostration (before the gods) and the enjoyment of goods,
All these, and all men, will pass away. [4] ;
All castes and colours, and Hindus and Muslims,

All animals and birds and all its species,

And all that appears in a vast expanse,

And all forms, will pass away. /5/

But the Lord’s Praise in Poise, the Essence of Worship,

Brings for ever Wisdom, Joy, and a Moveless Seat of Truth.

There in the Society of the Holy, one Utters with Relish the Praise (of the Lord)
And Abides in the Abode of fearlessness. [6]

There is no fear there, nor Doubt, nor Sorrow, nor Care,

No coming or going, and no Death whatever.

There is all Joy there for ever, and springs of Celestial Melodies,

And there the Devotees Jean on nothing but the Lord's Praise. /7/

The Transcendent Lord has no limits, no end,

Who, then, can contemplate His Whole Self?

Says Nanak : he, on whom is the Lord’s Grace

Swims across (the Sea of Existence) through the Society of the Holy, and becomes one with Eternity.

[8-4]
A

He, who kills this (Duality of the mind), is the True Victor.

He, who kills this (Duality), is the Perfect one.

He, who kills this (Duality), is Glorious.

He, who kills this (Duality), sheds all Sorrow. [1]

If there be one who kills his (Duality),

He, forsure, Enjoys the Bliss of Raja yoga. [| /]-Pause]

He, who kills this (Duality), becomes fearless. P. 238
He, who kills this (Duality), Merges in the (Lord's) Name.

He, who kills this (Duality), quenches his Thirst.

He, who kills this (Duality), is Approved at the Lord’s Court. [2]

He, who kills this (Duality), is the only Rich,

He, who kills this (Duality), is Truly Honourable.

He, who kills this (Duality), is the True Celibate.

He, who kills this (Duality), is Truly Emancipated. [3/

He, who kills this (Duality), his world’s sojourn is Approved,

He, who kills this (Duality), is eternally Rich,

He, who kills this (Duality), is of good Fortune.

He, who kills this (Duality), keeps Awake (to the Lord) night and day, [4]
He, who kills this (Duality), is Delivered even while alive.

He, who kills this (Duatid goes the Way of Piety.

He, who kills this (Duality), is truly Wise.

He, who kills this (Duality), Contemplates in Equipoise. [3]

Without killing one’s (Duality), one is Approved not.

Even if one were to practise myriads of works, meditations and austerities,
Without killing one’s Duality, one’s comings and goings cease not.
Without killing one’s Duality, one is Released not from the grip of the Yama. [6]
Without killing one’s Duality, one gathers not Wisdom.

Without killing one’s Duality, one can Wash not one's Dirt :

All is soiled and unclean without killing one’s Duality.

Without killing one’s Duality, one Loses all. /7/

He, on whom is the Grace of the Berieficent Lord,

He gets Emancipated and becomes a Miracle-man.

He, whose Duality has been destroyed by the Guru,

He, Nanak, Dwells on no one but the one Lord, /&-5]

Gauri M. 5

He, who is United with the Lord, is the Friend of all,
He, who is United with the Lord, has his mind at Peace.
He, who is United with the Lord, comes not to Sorrow.
He, who is United with the Lord, isEmancipated. [J]
O my mind, Unite thyself with thy Lord,
For, of no avail is any other task to thee. [/-Pause]
The big and great men of the world
Are of no avail, O crazy one !
The Lord’s Servant, even if of low birth,
In an instant, Saves all who seek his company. [2]
He, whose Name brings the Merit of a myriad ablutions,
He, by Dwelling on whom is the Merit of all Worship,
He, by hearing whose Word, one gathers a myriad Virtues,
To know whose Way from the Guru one gets a myriad Rewards, [3]
Cherish thou Him incessantly in thy mind :
For, all the loves of Maya will pass away.
The Eternal Lord ever Abides with thee.
So, be Imbued with thy Lord, O my mind! | [4]

- Hein whose Work all thy desires are fulfilled,
He in whose Work the Yama’s Couriers keep one not in the eye,
He in whose Work one glorious becomes
He in whose Work one is made Immortal : [5]

‘SSO SOMES CSCOGES CESS BOOHER OEE EBS BEGG GG BGC OC OGRE GOGO OC

&
a

hE
¥
&
L
&
i
8
&
,
§

Page. 27
Page 279

He whose Servant gets not the Punishment,

He whose Servant suffers no Loss,

In whose Court His Servants have to render no Account, ‘
Serve thou Him, with a conscious mind. /6/

He who is short of nothing,

He who is the One-in-many,

He by whose Eye of Grace one is Saved,

Serve thou Him, OQ my mind! /7/

There is neither any wise nor unwise,

Nor is any weak nor powerful, of himself,

As is His Will, so are we engaged, P, 239
(But), Nanak, he alone is the Lord's Servant in whose Lot it is so Writ. [8-6]

Gauri M. 5

Without Meditating on the Lord, one's life is like a snake's :
So do the Evil-doers! live, forsaking the (Lord’s) Name. [JJ
‘He, who lives for even a moment in Meditation,

Lives for billions of days, nay, forsooth eternally. {J-Pause]
Without Meditation, accursed are our works,

We are then crow-natured?, and abide in Dirt, [2]

Without Meditation, one does but a dog’s deeds,

The lover of Maya is like the son of a prostitute.

Who has no one to father him. /3/

Without Meditation, one is like a horned ram :

Black-faced, like a Shakra, one barks out what is false. [4/
Without Meditation, one brays like a donkey,

(For), the Evil-doers abide ever in Filth. [5/

Without Meditation, one is like a mad dog :

The Evil-doer can hold not his mind. /é/

Without Meditation, one Slays one’s Soul.

The Evil-doer is a low wretch, without Family or Caste. [7]
He, on whom is the Lord's Grace, Unites with the Holy,
And, says Nanak, he Swims across, through the Guru, the Sea of Existence. [8-7]

Gauri M, 5

Through the Guru’s Word, I attained to the Highest State (of Bliss).

The Perfect Guru has kept my Honour safe, (J

Through the Guru's Word, | Dwelt on the (Lord’s) Name, s
Through the Guru's Grace | attained Peace, {/-Pause]

Through the Guru's Word, I hear and utter with the tongue,

Through the Guru's Grace, Nectar-sweet is my speech. [2]

Through the Guru’s Word, my Ego has gone.

Through the Guru's Word, great is my Glory. [3]

Through the Guru's Word, my Doubts are dispelled,

Through the Guru's Word, I have Seen the Lord in everything. [4]

‘Through the Guru’s Word, I have attained to the highest Yoga.

In the company of the Guru are all men Saved. /3/

Through the Guru’s Word, all my tasks are Fulfilled.

Through the Guru's Word, I Receive the nine Treasures (of the Lord's Name). [6]
He, who rests his hopes on the Guru,

No more is the Yarna's Noose for him. [7]

Through the Guru’s Word my Destiny Awakes : :
And, Nanak, meeting with the Guru, [ Meet the Transcendent Lord. /8-&/

Gauri M, 5

1 Dwell upon the Guru every moment :
For, the True Guru is my life-breath, the whole Capital of my life. {J-Pause]

I, Lit. worshippers of Shakil.
2. Lit, crow-faced.

2232339 Guru-Granth Sali
I like to See the Vision of the Guru,

I Drink the Wash of the Guru's Feet, [J]

I Bathe myself in the Dust treaded over by the Guru :

And Cleanse my Soul of the Dirt of Ego, accumulated birth after birth, [2]
I wave the fan over that Guru,

Who has with his hands pulled me out of the great Fire (of Desire), [3/

1 fetch water for the houschold of that Guru,

From whom I've learnt the state of the attributeless Lord. [4]

I grind corn! at the Household of that Guru,

By whose Grace all my enemies are turned friends. [5/ P, 240
The Guru who Blest me with the Soul,

And who bought me over as his Slave, of Himself. [6]

And Blest me, His own, with his Love,

J greet Him ever and for ever more. [7]

All my Sorrows and Strife and Doubts and Fears have ended,

Says Nanak : “So Powerful is my Guru™. [8-9]

Gauri M. 5

Meet me, my Govind, and Bless me with Thy Name.

(For), without Thy Name accursed is all love. //-PauseJ

To wear and eat without Thy Name,

Is to be like a dog that eats dirt. [JJ

All works without Thy Name

Are like false decorations of the dead. [2]

To indulge in pleasures, forsaking Thy Name,

Brings not Peace even in a dream and the body writhes in Pain, [3]
To forsake Thy Name and indulge in other tasks

Is a false show, and wears off, /4/

If one’s mind loves not Thy Name,

One goes to Hell even if one does a myriad (pious) deeds. [5]
He, whose mind Dwelt not on the Lord's Name,

Is bound down like a thief, at the Yama’s abode. {6]
Myriads of shadow-shows in this vast Expanse

Are but vain, without the (Lord's) Name. [7]

(But), he alone Dwells on the Lord's Name,

Who, Nanak, is Blest with it, in His Mercy. /8-/0]

Gauri M, 5

1
He, who lasts with me in the beginning, the middle and the end,
That Friend alone does my mind seek. J
The Lord's Love keeps faith with me for ever,
For He, the Beneficent Purusha, the Perfect One, Sustains all, /{-Pause]
He lasts eternally and leaves me not,
And wherever [ See, [ See Him Pervading all. [2]
He the Beauteous, the Wise One, is the Life of our life,
Our Brother, Son, Father, Mother and Master. /3/
He is the Capital-stock of my life, my Mainstay,
Him | Love, and Enshrine Him in my heart. [4]
He, the Lord, has snapped my ties of Maya,
And made me His Own, Blessing me with His Eye of Grace. [5]
Dwelling on Him, all my Ailments are past,
And fixing my mind on His Feet, I attain all Peace. 6]
He's the Perfect Purusha, Ever-fresh, Ever-young,
And the Protector of me, within and without. /7/
Says Nanak : “Know thou the state* of Supreme Bliss, O seeker,
That thou art Blest with the ‘Treasure of the (Lord's) Name’. /8-J7/

lL. These verses refer not lo the physical service of the Guru, which is the Word, but denote a mental state of
utter humility.

2. ofa we (gfe a) ; Turiya or th: fourth state,
Gurn-Granth Dabib
Page 28

PI MBAIEECECOBOGOGHIOE SOCCOPEPCOCSOPOGECEE ERASE OSSSCOECEOSOLOSCOCORE

[ 232 }
Rag Gauri Majh M. 5

By the Grace of the Ore Supreme Being, the Kternal, the Hulightener.

Millions are in search of Thee, O Lord, (but) they know not Thy end :

(For), they alone attain to Thy Devotion on whom is Thy Grace. [J]

Iam a Sacrifice unto Thee, my Lord! [J-Pause]

Hearing that the Path fof life) is dreadful, ] am in fear,

And seek the Refuge of the Saints that I be Saved. [2] P. 241
O Thou, my Beloved, of Beauty Infinite, OQ Thou Enticer of the hearts, the Support of all,
I seek to See Thee and Bow down at the Feet of the Guru (to lead me on to Thee). /3/
I made friends with many, but am a Sacrifice unto thee alone.

(For), not one has all the Virtues that Thou the Treasure of Virtues hast. [4]

All over does Thy Name resound, and Thy Worshippers are in Bliss,

O Lord, I seek no other support but Thine,

May I be a Sacrifice unto Thee, [5]

The Guru has taken me out of the Wel] of May4, streching out his Hands to me,

And I have won over the Eternal Life,

That I mayn't Lose (the game of life) again, [6]

I have gathered the Treasure of all-Good,

Whose Merit is Ineffable.

I attain Glory at the Lord's Court, and wave about my arms (in joy). [7]

Nanak, the Lord's Servant, has found the Jewel (of the Lord's Name) beyond Value and Infinite,
And, through Service of the Guru, Swims across he the Sea of Fear :

And, lo, he proclaims this to all. /4&-J-/2/

Gauri M. 5

My the Grace of the ne Supreme Memg, the Eternal, the Lulightener.

Be thou [mbued with the Love of the Lord,

And utter thou His Name with the tongue, and ask for Him alone, //-Pause]
Shed thy Ego, and Dwell on the Wisdom of the Guru,

They, in whose Lot it is so Writ, by God, join the Society ofthe Holy. [1/

All that seems poes not along with us,

But the Worshippers of Maya are attached to it, and are wasted away. [2]

The Name of the Beauteous Lord Pervades all, eternally,

But rare is the one amongst millions who has Attained to it, through the Guru, 3]
Greet thou the Saints of the Lord,

And gather thou the nine Treasures of (the Lord’s Name) and Infinite Peace. [4]
My eyes seek to see the Lord’s Saints,

And my heart Sings of the Treasure of the Lord’s Name, [5]

Shed thou thy Lust, Anger, Greed and Infatuation,

And rise above birth and death. /6/

Thy Woes and Darkness will depart from: thy Home,

And Enshrining the Guru's Wisdom, thy (mind's) lamp will be lighted. [7]

He, who Served the Master, Swam across (the Sea of Existence) :

Nanak ; the whole world was Saved through the Guru. = /é-/-J3)

Gauri M. 5

Dwelling on the Lord and the Guru, my Doubts were dispelled,
And my mind rested in Peace. {J—Pause/

On Fire I was ; the Guru poured Water on me ;

My Guru is fragrant like the Chandun-tree. [1]

© Gurn-Granth Salih

Page 28
Lo, the Darkness of Ignorance is dispelled and the Light of the Guru's Wisdom burns bright within
me. [2]

The Sea of Fire is Deep ; it is the Boat of the Saints wherewith we are Ferried across. [3/

Neither good Deeds, nor Religion, nor Piety is in me, but the Lord owned me, taking me by the Hand. [4]

The Lord’s Name is the Destroyer of Fear and Woes : the. Lord is the Lover of His Worshippers. [5]

He is the Support of the supporiless, Beneficent for the meek, the All-powerful, Refuge of the Saints, /6/

This is the Prayer of the meritless : ““O Lord, my King, Bless me with Thy Vision: [7]

“Nanak seeks Thy Refuge, O Master ; he, Thy Servant, is at Thy Door’. [8-2-14]

Gauri M. 5

The fool revels in Maya and knows not (his Destiny). {JJ P. 242
“T earn, I gather,” says he, and so passes his whole life. /1-Pause]

“T am brave, I'm the master of all, and no one is equal to me,"" [2]

He has pride. of beauty, culture and family. [3]

And deluded by the False mind?, he forsakes it not tillthe end. [4]

He passes on his riches to his brothers, friends and kinsmen. /[3/

For being attached to Desire (his whole life), he can think of nought else at the end. /6/

He is bound down by the pride of pious deeds. [7]

O Thou Beneficent Lord, have Pity on me, for, Nanak is the Slave of Thy Slaves. /8-3-15-¢4]

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Tinlightener-

Rag Gauri Poorbi, Chhant M. 1

é)
A)
2)
B)
©)
g)
&)
6)
CJ
6)
EJ
at
a
é)
Ey
nt
é)
a
&)
E)
@)
)
fi)
F)
e)
E)
e)
)
6)
e)
The Bride, Separated from her Spouse, passes her sleepless Night in Pain, 3
She wears Thin, Jonging intensely for her Lord.
She wears Thin i in her sad sweet Desire, to See her Spouse, 3
For, all her Embellishments and Delicacies are of no avail to her. 8
Proud of her Beauty, she is Worn out, and her Breasts yield Milk no more*. ; -2
Nanak : ifthe Lord so Wills she Meets with Him, (but) without the Lord, she can Sleep not in Peace. [J] 3
Without the Lord, the Beloved, the Bride is helpless.
How can she attain Peace, without Enshrining Him in her heart ? .
Ask thou thy mates, O Bride, is there a home without the Groom ?
Without the (Lord's) Name, there is no love that brings thee Peace,
Enshrine thou then the Truth of the Friend in the mind, and Know thy Spouse through the Guru's Word.
Nénak : the Bride that forgets not the Lord's Name, Merges in Equipoise, through the Name. [2]
Assemble, O ye my mates, let’s Dwell on the Lord,
I'll send Him my Love-message through the Guru’s Word.
Through the Guru, the True Word is Revealed to me, while the Egocentrics come to Grief,
The Wandering mind is held when one Realises the Truth (of the Lord).
When one Realises True Values, one is ever-young ; the Love of the Word keeps us for ever fresh.
By His Grace, we attain True Equipoise, assemble then ye, O my mates, (and Sing His Praise). /3/
My Desire was fulfilled and my Friend Came to my Home,
And Meeting my Groom, my Mates sang the Song of Joy.
Singing the Wedding-songs, I was Imbued with the Lord's Love and my Mind oozed out Joy.
And my Friends were Pleased and the Detractors came to Grief; Dwelling on the (Lord’s) Truth, I
reaped the Fruit of Truth,
With joined palms, the Bride prays, lost ever in the Love of the Lord,
“Q Lord, my Desire is Fulfilled and I Revel with Thee in Joy". [4-I]
&)
i]
+)

Gauri Chbant M. ft

Hear Thou, © Lord, the prayer of the lone one in Wilderness ; : P. 243
O Thou Self-dependent Lord, how shall I be comforted without Thee ? :

Treacherous is the Night, I can live not without Thee,

] get no Sleep in Thy Love : hear Thou then my prayer.

Without Thee, O Beloved, there's no one to take care of me, : and I Wail all alone (in Wilderness). ri
Nanak : the Bride is in Anguish without her Lord, but Meets Him she only when He so Wills, [7] Q
1. wu-ala (ara qfr) : Lit, bound to (false) mind. 3
2. eu ge} a wee (gn wait @ ara): the phrase, according to some, means: “The teatsonce “ted yield no more F
milk, that is, human life comes not to one again."* However, it also means that she now can do oo more mw od deeds, a
becoming barren. 3
a)

Guru-Granth Salih 9999999999999929999999999999999999992929 999990990"
Page 282 
Who can Unite her with the Lord when she is ‘abandoned’ by the Spouse ?

It is through the Word and when she’s Imbued with His Love, that she Mests Her God.

When one looks Beauteous through the Word, one is Honoured, and the Light (of Wisdom) Illumines
one’s body :

Hear thou, O my Mate, she, who is at Peace through the (Lord's) Truth, Dwells on the Merits of the
True One alone.

When she Meets her Spouse, led by the Guru, she is Enjoyed by Him and, through the Nectar-Word,
she Flowers,

Nanak : the Spouse Enjoys His Bride only if He is Pleased with her. [2]

Maya has enticed us out of our (True) Homes: the False ones are cheated by Falsehood.

How will the Noose (of Maya) be loosed, O dear, without the dear, dear Guru.

He, who is in Love with the Lord and Dwells on the Word, he belongs to the Lord.

But the inner Dirt goes not through (customary) charity, piety or washing of the body.

Not one has attained Deliverance without the Lord's Name, and self-torture or living in wilderness avail
one not.

Nanak : through the Word is the Home of Truth Attained: how can one find the Lord's Castle in
Duality? {3/)

True is Thy Name, O Dear, True the Contemplation of Thy Word.

True is Thy Castle, O Dear, True Thy Name, Thy Trade.

Sweet is the Trade of Thy Name, and the Devotee earns the Profit, night and day.

Without Thee, there’s no Merchandise to Deal in, | Utter Thy Name every moment,

Through Perfect Destiny, and the Lord's Grace, | Know now the True account (of my God).

Nanak : sweet is the Essence of the (Lord's) Name ; (but) through the Perfect Gurudo I Attain to the

Truth, [4-2]

Rag Gauri Poorbi, Chhant M. 3

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Eternal, the All-pervuding,
the Creator, the Purusha, the Hnlightener.

The Bride prays, Dwelling’ on the Merits of her Lord,

“QO Dear, my Beloved, I cannot be without Thee, even for a moment"

Without the Spouse, one can live not, and without the Guru, one Attains not to the Lord's Castle.

Do thou then forsure® that what the Guru Instructs, and blow out the fire of Desire,

True only is the Lord, without Him there is nought, without His Service one gets no Peace.

(Says) Nanak : “The Bride Meets her Lord only if He so Wills, and if He Unites her with Himself, of
Himself". fi}

Blessed is the Night, for the Bride Attains to her Lord,

(When) she Serves her Guru, in Love, losing her Ego,

When she sheds her Ego, and Sings the Lord’s Praise and-Loves the Lord instantly.

Hearken then ye, O my loving Mates, Merge ye in the Guru’s Word.

If ye Remember the Merits of the Lord, ye are His Beloveds, if ye Love the (Lord's) Name. P, 244

Nanak : the Bride is the Beloved of the Man if she wears the Necklace of His Name. [2] .

Lone is the Bride without the Groom.

Beguiled by Duality is she, without the dear Guru's effectual Word?,

wi ay the Word, how can she Swim across the Tempestuous Sea, when she is being wasted away by
aya.

Lured away by Falsehood, she was Deserted by the Man, and so Mounts not to the Castle of the Lord,

(But), Imbued with the Word, and Merged in Equipsise, ‘she is Attuned to the Lord, night and day,

Nanak : such a one is ever Imbued with the Lord's Love and is United with the Lord by His Grace, 3]

- Ald (aTz) : (Sindhi) to cherish. The word has also been used to meaa : to attain, carry out, fulfil, embellish

with, spread out etc,
2. ug (78) —=Raud : forsure.

3 wag (wat wart) : fit. powerful word.

‘ sa Soa oe a

SD i oe ED TT TS Ee ET el PD Guru-Grartis Sahib
Page 28

We Meet with the Lord, if He so Wills : how can we Meet Him, if not through His Grace.
Without the Guru, our Beloved, who else can dispel our Doubts ?

Through the Guru are the Doubts dispelled, and the Bride Meets with the Lord, and is in Bliss.
Without the Guru's Service, all is Dark for us ; without the Guru, one finds not the Path,
Nanak : The Bride, in Love, and Imbued with Equipoise, Dwells on the Guru's Word,

And finds her Lord, the Gad, through the Love of her True Guru. [4-7]

Gauri M, 3

I am utterly Jost without my Lord, O mother, how can [ live without my Master ?

Without Him, | get not a wink of Sleep, and the Bridal Dress decks not my bedy.

The Bridal Dress suits me only if the Master Loves me, and, through the Guru’s Word, I am Attuned
to Him.

Then, for ever, Tam the Master's Own, when I Serve the Guru, and ] am locked in His sweet Embrace,

The Man Enjoys her Bride if she Meets Him through the Guru's Word and she reaps the Profit of the
(Lord's) Name in the world.

Wanak : the Bride is beloved of the Lord if she Dwells on the Merits of the Lord. [1]

The Bride Enjoys the Lord's Love :

Night and day, she is Imbued with His Love, and Dwells on the Guru's Word.

(O Bride), shed then thy Ego, Dwell on the Guru’s Word, and Meet with thy Lord, the God.

She alone is the Lord’s Own, who is for ever Imbued with His Love, through the True and Dear Name.

If we Meet with our Guru, we gather the (Lord's) Nectar, and we shed our Duality.

Nanak : the Bride then finds her Groom, and all her Woes are past. [2]

The Woman forsakes the Lord, lured by Maya's love,

Attached fo Falsehood, she is guiled by appearances. : :

If she dispels her Falsehood, and Cherishes the Guru's Word, she loses not her life ina Gamble,

And Dwells she on the Guru's Word, and Merges in Truth, and stills her Ego from within :

And Enshrines the (Lord’s) Name in her heart, if this be her Embellishment.

And she leans cn the Name alone, and she Merges in Equipoise. {i}

Meet me, O my Beloved ; without Thee, I'm of no worth. :

In my Eyes there is no Sleep, and | have lost desire even for food or water.

I Jove not food nor water, and Wail longing for Him :

Without the Lord, how can | be at Peace ?

And so] pray to the Guru : “Unite me, my Lord, as it Pleases Thee”. P. 245

Lo, the Blissful Lord of Himself Unites me with Himself,

He Himself comes into my Home.

Nanak : such a Bride is always the Lord's Own ;

Yea, of the Lord who neither goes nor dies, /{4-2/

Gauri M, 3

The (Lord's) Bride is pierced through with the Lord's Love, the natural way. _

The Enticer of the hearts entices her away and her Duality gives way to Equipoise.

Her Duality lost in Equipoise, she finds her Lord, and through the Guru's Word, she is Imbued with
is Love,

This body, full of False values, commits Sin in profusion, a

But the Lord’s Worship, through which one Hears the Music of Equipoise, cleans all one’s Dirt.

Nanak : the Bride is then the beloved of her Lord, if she sheds her Ego from within. [J]

The Bride finds her Lord, through the Love of the Guru ;

Enshrining her Lord in the heart, she Enjoys a peaceful Night's Sleep.

Enshrining the Lord in her heart, her Woes depart for ever,

And within her own ‘Castle’ she enjoys her Spouse, by Dwelling en the Guru's Word.

She Drinks in the Nectar-Name, night and day, stilling her Duality.

Nanak : so does the Lord's own Bride Meet her beloved, through the infinite Love of the Guru. [2]

Be Thou in Mercy, O Lord, my Beloved, my Dear, my Own,

Thy Bride prays to Thee : “I Deck myself with the True Word.

Decking myself with the True Word, I still my Ego, and through the Guru, I am Fulfilled’.

The Lord eternally is True, through the Guru's Word is this Truth Realised.

The Egocentric is lured by Lust, and writhes, being Attached :

Now, who shall she go to, to cry oul her Woes ?

For, without the dear, dear Guru, she finds no Peace, [3]

Guru-Grantk Sahib 99999999990929900°

Page 28
=]

The Bride is Ignorant, without Merit,

The Lord is Infinite and Unknowable.

He Unites her with Himself, of Himself, and Forgives her too, of Himself.

The Lord is the Beloved of the Bride, the Great Merciful He, who Pervades all hearts.

He is Attained through loving Adoration : this is the Truth Revealed to me by the Guru.

For ever is then one in Joy being Attuned to the Lord,

And imperceptibly is the Lord Attained, and the Bride attains all the nine Treasures (of Bliss), [4-3]

Gauri M, 3

Maya's Sea is tempestuous : how is one to go across ?

Make the Lord's Name thy Boat, and the Word thy Boatman.

So does the Lord take thee across the tempestuous Sea,

Through the Guru, one attains to the Worship of the Lord ; so does one Die even in life,

In an instant, all one's Sins are Washed off by the Lord's Name, and ones body becomes Pure.
Nanak : through the Lord’s Name is Deliverance, and the black Coal is transmuted into Gold. [1]

Man and woman are lured away by Lust, and know not the Way to the Lord's Name. P. 246

One loves dearly the mother, the father, the sons and the brothers and is thus Drowend in the
(seemingly) waterless Sea (of Maya).

One 1s Drowned, for driven by Ego, one knows not the Way.

He who is born will pass away and those alone will be Saved who Dwell on the Guru’s Word,

If one turns God-wards, one Utters the Lord’s Name and thus Saves himself and his Clan.

Nanak : within one (then) Abides the Lord's Name and, through the Guru's Word, one Meets with his
Love. [2]

Nothing is eternal save the Lord’s Name, O dear, the world is but a play.

Take then to the True Worship and Deal only in the Lord’s Name.

The Lord's Trade is Infinite and Unfathomable ; through it, we receive the wealth of the Guru's Word,

Wherewith we fix our mind on the Service (of the Lord) which is True Worship, and we lose our Ego
from within.

We are Senseless, Blind fools ; the Guru has shown the Path unto us ;

Nanak : through the Guru is one made Beauteous with the Word, and one Dwells, night and day, on
the Lord’s Praise. [3]

He Himself Does, and Makes others do (all) ; He Himself Bedecks one with the Word,

He Himself is the Guru, He Himself the Word, He Himself is the Lover of the Devotees through the ages.
Through the ages has He Loved the Devotees, and Himself Bedecks all and Engages all in His Worship.
He Himself is the All-wise, the Seer ; He Himself Engages us in His Service.

He, the Lord, Blesses us with Merit and Destroys our demerits, and Brings His Name into our hearts,
Nanak is a Sacrifice unto the True One, who is the Doer and the Cause. [4-4]

Gauri M. 3

O my dear (mind), Serve thou the Guru and Dwell on the Lord’s Name :

Thou hast not to run away from me’, (for), in thy Home thou Receivest thy Lord.

In one’s Home one Receives the Lord, and through True Dedication, Attunes oneself to Lord, the God.
o The Guru's Service is Peace-giving, and He alone is engaged in it whom the Lord so inspires.

He Sows the Lord's Name ; the Name Sprouts within him, and he Enshrines the Name in his mind.

Nanak oy one aan Glory through the True Name and one (thus) Receives what is Writ in one’s Lot by

The Lord's Name is sweet, O my dear, Taste it with thy whole mind :

Taste thou, O dear tongue?, forsaking all other tastes.

When | ie Lord so Wills, one Receives the Essence of the Lord, and on one’s tongue is the Beauteous
ofr

And, one Dwells on the Name and is ever at Peace, Attuned to-the (Lord's) Name,

By Lord’s Will’ is one born, by His Will does one die ; by His Will is one Merged in Trut

Nanak : we Receive the Name through the Guru's Word and the Lord Himself Attunes us to  rimmself. f2]}

1. de. the buman body.
2. ya aig (gists): @ aeté : @ popular phrase of endearment, not of curse,
3. am (ara) : dit, through the Name.

Page 285 
To serve another, O dear, is false, one leaves the (mind's) bride (at home), and wanders out in the
Yonder lands. .

In Duality (thus) one gets not Peace, O dear, why then crave for the Poison ?

He who craves for the Poison and is lured away by Doubt, how can he find Peace ?

The service of another is painful ; for selling oneself, one loses one’s Faith ;

And, bound to Maya, one's mind is held not, and every moment is one oppressed by Pain,

Nanak : Maya's Pain goes only if one is Attuned to the Guru's Word, [3] P, 247

O dear, the self-willed, wild Fool enshrines not the Word in his mind,

The delusion of Maya is born of Ignorance, then how can one find the Lord's Way ?

If the True Guru wills it not $0, how can one find the Way : the Egocentric asserts his Ego (in vain).

The Lord's Servants are ever at Peace, for, they fix their minds on the Guru's Feet,

He, on whom is the Lord’s Grace, Sings His Praise,

Nanak : the Jewel of the Name is the only worthwhile Profit in the world : this is the Wisdom revealed
to the God-awakened Souls, [4¢-5]

Rag Gauri Chbant M. 5
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Enlightener.

In my. mind is Sadness ; how shall I See the Beneficent Lord ?

He, who is my Friend and Mate and Master and Guru, the Purusha, the Maker of the Destiny.

© Thou Purusha, the Maker of my Destiny, the Master of Lakshmi, pray, how may I, the Sad one, See
Thy Face ?

My hands Serve Thee, my head is at Thy Feet, and in my humble mind is the Desire to See Thee,

I forget Thee not even for an instant ; mght and day, every hour, every moment (J Dwell on Thee),

Says Nanak : “Like the Chatrik, [ thirst for Thee ; how may ] See Thee, my Lord 7” [J]

I pray to Thee, O Dear, listen unto me, O my Spouse :

My body and mind are drawn to Thee, O my Dear, on seeing Thy Wonders :

Thy Wonders draw me unto Thee ; how shall the Love-lorn Bride become Content ?

My Spouse is Meritorious and Beneficent, Ever-young and full of Merit :

Why accuse the Lord, the Giver of Peace, when | was Separated from Him by my own Sins.

Nanak prays Thee, “O Lord, be Merciful : and come back to my Home”. [2]

I surrender my body and mind to Thee, O Lord, and all that is mine.

I surrender my head to my Beloved Friend who brings me the Message from my Master.

To the Guru of Blessed Station have I surrendered my head, and he has Revealed to me the Lord within
me.

And my Woes have ceased in a moment, and I am Fulfilled, as was my heart’s Desire.

The Bride now Enjoys night and day, and all her Doubts are cast away.

Prays Nanak : “She now gets the kind of Spouse that is after her heart”. [3]

In my Mind is Bliss and in it Rings the Music of Gladness.

My Beloved Lord has entered my Home, and all my Thirst is quenched.

I've Met my Beloved Lord and Master and my Mates Sing the Songs of Joy,

And all my Friends and Kinsmen are in Bloom, and the Demons have been laid low.

Within my Home Rings the Unbeaten Melody, and 1 am Abed with my Lord.

Prays Nanak : “I Attain now to Equipoise : (for), the Lord of Peace I have Met”. [4-1]

Gauri M.5

© Mohan", thou abidest in a heavenly home of infinite glory : P, 248

Thy abode is beauteous, the sanctuary of the Saints.

Of infinite glory is thy sanctuary, O thou beneficent master ; and all sing thy praise.

And, wherever gather the Saints, they Dwell on thee, :
Take pity on the meek, O thou beneficent one. ‘

Nanak prays thee : I seek to see thy sight whereby I attain to the Peace of Piety”. [J]

1. Baba Mohan, the eldest son of Guru ‘Amar Dags, had in his keeping the two volumes of the Guru's Word
gathered by his father. Guru Arjun, the writer of this verse, is said to have sung this bymo in praise of Biba Mohan in
order to persuade him to part with his treasure, which he did. Some scholars are of the opinion that the verse is addressed
not to Babi Mohan but to God. But the second, third & fourth verses support the former view.

Page 28
O Mohan, wonderous is thy speech, wonderous thy ways.

Thou Believest only in the One, all else are as dust to thee.

Believest thou only in the One Master, the Unknowable, who wields all powers.

Thou hast, through the Guru’s Word, captured the heart of thy Primordial Lord, the God of the woods,
Thou art he who stays and goes as he willeth, (for), thou art Blest with all powers.

] pray thee : “Save our honour, for all thy servants have sought thy refuge". [2]

© Mohan, everyone in the holy Sengha dwells upon thee, fixing their minds on thy vision :

He, who dwells on thee, the Yoma touches him not.

The Yama touches them not who are attuned to thee with a single mind.

They, who dwell on thee with word, thought and deed, attain to all they seek.

The Wild, Ignorant fools become Wise on seeing thy sight.

Says Nanak, “Thy dominion is eternal, for thou art the perfect Person, yea, the Master himself!’, [3]

© Mohan, thou hast fruitioned with thy kinsmen :

And all thy sons, friends and family are Saved.

Nay, the whole world shedding its Ego is Saved by thy sight.

He who says ‘Amen’ to thee, him the Yarna touches not,

iahnite are thy merjts, indescribable and ineffable, O thou, the True Guru, the Purusha, O killer of the
CMOns :

Nanak prays : “Mohan, I lean on thee that ] may Swim across the Sea of Existence’. [4-2]

Gauri M. 5
Shaloka

Myriads of Sinners, O-Lord, are Purified by Thee : | am a Sacrifice unto Thee ever and for ever more.
Thy Name burns off all our Sins as doth fire burn the straw. {J

Chhant

Dwell thou, O my mind, on the Lord, Narayan, Govind, the Destroyer of Fear, the Master of Maya.

Dwell thou, O mind, on Murari, the Emancipator, who Snaps the bondage of the painful Death,

He, pre is ihe Dispeller of Sorrow, the Refuge of the meek, the Master of Lakshmi ; Dwell thou on His
otus-Feet,

That thou Crossest safe the Fama’s awful Path, and the treacherous Sea of Fire, in an instant.

He, who Destroys thy Sins and makes thee Pure, Attune thyself to Him night and day.

Nanak prays: “Take Pity on me, O Thou, the Support of the earth, the Master of Maya”. [J]

Dwell thou, O mind, on Damodara, the Destroyer of Pain and Fear, thy Lord, the King.

Yea, He, who Enjoys with Lakshmi, the Beneficent Lord, the Beauteous One, whose innate nature it is to
Love His Lovers. ,

He is the Perfect Purusha, the Lover of His Lovers : Meeting Him one Receives all one seeks. P, 249

He who takes us out of the Dark, Blind Well, Enshrine thou His Name in the mind.

The adepts, the Angels and their Couriers, the heavenly Singers, the Seers, and Devotees, all Sing Thy
many, many Praises, O Lord!

Nanak prays : “Take Pity on me, O Transcendent Lord, my Master, my King". [2]

Dwell thou on the Transcendent Lord, O my mind, the God of pods, who wields all Power.
For, He is the Beneficent One, the Powerful Master, the Mainstay of all hearts,

The Giver of life, body and mind, the Infinite, Unknowable, Yonder of the Yond,

The Refuge of all, the All-powerful, the Enticer of hearts, who Dispels all thy Sorrows.

All Ailments depart, all Pain, all Sorrow, by Dwelling on the Name of the Lord.

Nanak prays : “Take Pity on me, O Lord, for Thou art All-powerful”. [3]

oO my mind, Sing the Praise of the Eternal, Immortal Lord, for He, the Beneficent One, is the Highest
of the high.

He is the only Sustainer of the universe, and Sustains each and all.

He, the Sustainer of the untveis., *he Great, the Beneficent, the Wise, is Merciful to all.

Departs the Pain of Death and Greed and Lust from him in whose heart Dwells the Lord.

He, with whom He, the God, is Plea.*1. his Service fruitions and he 1s Fulfilled :

And, all his Desires are accomplished by “welling on the Lord, who is Beneficent to the meek. [4-3]

1. niga (aga) ; (Sans. eeqy) imperishable.

Page 28
Gauri M, 5

Come my mates, let us make an effort, and reconcile our Lord to us,

And entice Him away, shedding our Ego with the potion of the Saint's Mantram,

When He is under our sway, He leaves us not: this is the innate nature of our Master :

And Destroys He the fear of age and death and Hell, and Purifies all his beings. {JJ

Hark, O my mates, to my prayer, let us resolve thus in the mind :

That we rid ourselves of Desire, the natura! way, and Sing His Praise.

When our (baser) desires and sorrows and doubt are dispelled, we Attain what our heart (truly) yearns

or.

And then, Nanak, we Dwell on the Name of the Transcendent Lord, the Perfect One, the God of gods.
(2)

O my mates. [ Jong for Him, and pray that the Master fulfils my (only) Hope.

l crave for the Touch of His Feet, long in agony for His Sight, and search for Him all over.

I find Him in the Socicty of the Saints ; then, He, the All-powerful Purusha, Unites me with Himself.

Says Nanak : “O mother, he is the Fortunate one, who Meets with the Giver of Peace, the Perfect
Man”, {3

O my mate, ae ever to Abide with my Spouse, (for), my body and mind are now used! to Him.

O my mate, { love the calm Sleep wherein I may dream of my Love :

And my Doubt is dispelled and the Peace of the Master’ s Equipoise dawns upon me and I am Illumined
and my ‘Lotus’ flawers,

And I Wed the Transcendent Lord, the Inner-knower, yea, the Spouse who Stays forever. {4-4-2-5-}1]

By the Grare of the One Supreme Being, the ternal, the Enlightener.
Gauri Bawan Akhari? M. 5

Shaloka

The Guru is the Mother, the Father, the God of gods, the Master : P. 250

The Guru is the Mate, the Destroyer of Ignorance, the Kinsman, the Brother’,

The Guru is Beneficent who Blesses us with the Lord’s Name ; by His Mantram is the mind held,4

The Guru is the embodiment of Peace, Truth, Wisdom, the philospher’s stone, whose touch turns all
into gold, and more.

The Guru is the Place of pilgrimage, the Poo! of Nectar, Bathing in which brings infinite Wisdom.

The Guru js the Creator, the Destroyer of al] Sins, Purifying all Sinners.

The Guru is from the beginning of Time, through ages upon ages, Dwelling on whose Mantram one is

Saved.
The Lord Blesses us with the Society of the Guru that we, the Ignorant Sinners, are also Saved.
i}

The Guru is the Transcendent Lord, the God of gods : Nanak salutes the Guru-God.

Shaloka

He Himself is the Doer and the Cause : His is the only Power that Doth all.
Nanak : He, the One, Pervades all ; there is no one other than Him, nor will there ever be. [J]

Pauri (Aum)

Greetings to the Guru-God,

Who, the Formless One, is in the beginning, the middle and the end.
He Himself is in Primordial Trance®, Himself He in the Seat of Peace,
He Himself hears, Himself singing His own Praise*.

He Himself Created Himself ;

He is His own Father and Mother.

fafsmut (frfaar) : (Pothohari) : accustomed. J
Lit, $2 letters (of Sanskrit), [tis an alphabetical poem.
hued (agra) —=na Ged, from the same womb ; i.e. the real brother.

face (fattrit) : that what holds, stops.
As (at) : (From Sans. qq, Lit. void), the state of the Lord ia His Absolute Self.

Rs (Tet): (from qe), praise.

Gurv-Granth Sahib 99999999090999999999990999999999999999022999990090")

ee eS >
BASSSSlCECSSOSGOCES

Page 28
[| 240 |

He Himself is the Subtle, He Himself the Apparent,

Nanak : no one can know of this, His Play. [J/

© Thou, Beneficent One, take Pity on the meek one,

That my mind becomes the Dust to be treaded over by Thy Saints. [Pause]

Shaloka

He, the Formless One, is also in Form. He is the Absolute and also the Related one.
Nanak : He who is known as the One alone becomes the many He.

Pauri (4)

He, the Primordial Guru, Created ull forms.

He, the One, Strings all on a single thread.

Creates He the Three Modes, the diverse expanse,

And evolves His Absolute bemg into the Reluted one.
And Created He the Creation of diverse kinds,

And birth and death, and the involvements of the mind,
But, He Himself is above this all.

Nanak : Infinite is He, of Him there is no end. [2]

Shaloka

They alone are truly rich who in-gather the Treasure of the Lord's Name.
Nanak : from such Saints one gathers Truth and Piety. [7

Pauri (Sass)

True, True, True, is He.

Nay, not one ts separate from the True Purusha.

He alone seeks His Refuge whom He Blesses thus,

And he Dwells on, and utters the Lord's Praise.

Him Doubt overwhelms not,

And he Sees the Presence of the Lord's Glory (all over).
He alone is the Saint who mounts to this State :

Nanak is for ever a Sacrifice unto him. [3]

Shaloka .
Why run after wealth and more wealth : the love of Maya is all false.
Without the Lord’s Name, Nanak, it is no better than dust. [7] P. 251

Pauri (Dhadhi)

Blessed is the Dust of Thy Saint's Feet, O Lord :

Blessed are those whose mind seeks nought but this.

They seek not wealth, nor the Pleasures of Paradise,

And love no one but Thee, their Dearest One, and seek but the Dust of the Saint's Feet.
They are involved not in the strife (of the world),

And leave not the One, nor go to another.

He, whose heart the Lord Blesses with His Name,

He, Nanak, is the Saint ; He is the Perfect Lord Himself. [4]

Shaloka

Neither thy distinctive coal, nor knowledge, nor concentration, nor forcing of will lead the to thy Lord: -
He, on whom is the Lord’s Grace, is the Devotee, and truly Wise. [J]

Pauri (Gangan)

Wisdom comes not through tall talk,

Nor through the many ways that the Shastras tell.

He alone is Wise who Enshrines the Lord in his mind,

Hearing the tell-tale stories one comes to nothing.

The Wise one is he who ania... /» the Will (of the Lord),

And looks upon pain and pleasure! alike,

And, through the Guru,. Dwells up. the Quintessence (of Reality) ;
On him, Nanak, is the Grace of the Lo: 7. [5]

1, @aa sla (ea aha) : fi. heat and cold. _

sede) rete) a) ca ca) TaD] Guru-Granth Sahib
Page 28
He, who comes into the world but Knows not (the Reality), leads an animal's life,
Nanak : he alone Knows, through the Guru, in whose Lot itis so Writ. [J]

Pauri

One comes into this life to Dwell upon the One alone ;

But, being born, one is enticed away by Maya.

In the womb of the mother, one stands on one's head, praying (for one's release),
And, with every breath, one Dwells upon the Lord.

But, (in the world) one is involved in what one must leave,

And thereafter forgets from the mind the Great Giver.

O Lord, he, on whom is Thy Grace,

Forsakes Thee not either here or Hereafter. [6/

Shaloka

One comes by His Will, and Praises Him too by His Will ; without the Lord's Will, there is nought :
He alone escapes his coming and going who Ensbrines the Lord in his mind. [1]

Pauri

The life passed through many, many wombs,

And, enraptured by sweet Attachment, passes through life after life.
This Maya has yoked all to three Modes :

And every heart it has fired with its own love.

O my friend, tell me of a way out,

That I may Swim across the (tumultuous Sea of) Maya.

He, who joins the Holy, by the Lord’s Grace,

Nanak : him pollutes not the touch of Maya, [7]

Shaloka

All action, all good and evil, are through the Lord.
The animal says : “Tis I who did it’ ; but what it is that he can do without God [1]

Pauri

He the One does all, alone.

Through Him is the evolyement of Good and Evil ;
And as He Wills so one does in this life,

And gathers what He, the Lord, Gives.

His limits are known not to another,

And, it ha s as He Directs.

From the One is all the Expanse (of the Universe).
He the One Saves all. (ap

Shaloka

One is carried away by the love of pleasure and women,
But like the colour of safflower, passes off the show of Maya.
Nanak : seek thou the Refuge of Him through whom one loses one's Ego. [J]

Panri

O my mind, without. the Lord's love, all thy involvements are like chains, P. 252
And, Bondage, from which there is no Release, Binds thee, through thy deeds, O worshipper of M4ya.,
Going the way of works, one carries a heavy load of Ego :

For, he Loves not the Lord's Name and his deeds turn into Sins.

One is caught in the Yarna’s Noose, lured by the sweet breath of Maya,

And knows not, possessed by Doubt, that the Lord is ever with him.

On our own Account we get not Release as the mud is washed not,

(But), he who Knows the Lord has-his mind Purified. /9/

Shaloka

He, who is Released from Bondage, attains to the Society of the Holy.
Nanak : he, who is Imbued with the Lord's Colour, alone has a fast Colour, [iJ

l. way os ("er tr) : involved (7g) in Karma (way of works),

Page 290 
Pauri ( Rar)

Dye thy mind in the Lord's Colour :

And Utter the Lord's Name with thy tongue,
Then no one will be impolite to thee in the Lord’s Court.

And all will welcome thee to thy Exalied Seat.

Thou wilt find a Seat in the Lord's Castle,

And then thou art born not to die ;

He, on whose Forehead is Writ large the Lord's Grace.
Nanak : into his Home comes the Treasure of the Lord. 1/0]

Shaloka

¢ Greed, Falsehood, Sin and Attachment lure away the Blind fools :
And, bound down by Miya, they lick the Dirt. [7]

Pauri (Lalit)

Drugged by the potion of Maya.
Man lies unconscious, wrapt in Ego,
And is born to die again and again, enveloped all over by Maya,
For, such also is the Will of the Lord,
: Neither is any Perfect, nor Imperfect :

oo Neither is any Wise, nor Unwise.
As is the Lord’s Will so does the man engage himself :
(But) our Master, Nanak, is forever Detached, [///

Shaloka

He, the Lord, the Support of the earth, is Deep and Vast:
Nanak : there is no one to equal thy Self-sufficient Lord. 7 /

Pauri (Lait)

There is no one to equal the Lord.

He is the One Supreme : like Him, there is not another.

He, the Eternal, is, was and shall be :

His limits no one has known.

He Abides in the worm as inthe elephant,

And is Manifest and known all over,

He, whom the Lord Blesses with His Taste,

He, Nanak, by the Guru's Grace, Dwells on the Lord. 7/2)

Shaloka

He, who Knows the Taste of Bliss, Enjoys the Lord's Love the natural way.
Blessed, Blessed is such a one, Nanak, for he is Approved (by the Lord). JJ

Pauri

Fruitful is the life of one

Whose tongue Utters the Praise of the Lord ;

Who Abides in the Society of the Saints,

And, Imbued with the Lord's Love, Dwells on the Lord’s Name, night and day,
Fruitful is that life alone which is Imbued with the Lord's Name,

And on whom is the Mercy of the Lord, the Maker of our Destiny,

He's born but once, and is cast not into the womb again,

And so, Nanak, he Merges into the Being of the Lord. “J/3]

Shaloka

He, by Dwelling on whom one’s mind Rejoices, and one sheds one’s sense of Duality,
And Sorrow and Desire, and one Merges in His Name, (Dwell thou on Him). //)

Pauri (Yayy)

Burn thou thy sense of Duality ; P. 253
And abide in the realm of Peace and Equipoise.

Repair thou to the Refuge of the Saints

With whose help one Swims across the Sea of Fear.

Page 29
He, who weaves in his mind the One Name (of God),

Js cast not again into the womb. 7
Through the Perfect Guru's Support, one loses not (the Merit of) life,
And attains Peace, Nanak, by Wearing the One Lord in the heart, {J4)

Shaloka
Within my body and mind Abides the Lord, who keeps me company both here and Hereafter.
Nanak : when one Receives Instruction from the Perfect Guru, one Dwells on the Lord, ever and for

ever more. [J/

Pauri :
Dwell thou on Him, night and day, who Saves thee in the end :
This Poison! is illusory, and all have to leave it in a day or two,
Whose is the father, mother, son and the daughter,

And house and wife: can they keep thee company (for ever) ?
Treasure then only that which goes not,

And thou art Received with Honour in thy (True) Home.

In this Dark age he who Recites the Praises of the Lord,

Falls not again into the womb. = [J3/

Shaloka
If one be of great beauty, of high family, seemingly wise and clever and rich,
But Loves not the Lord, he is dead ike a corpse.

Pauri (Ganga)

He who knows the wisdom of the six Shastras, -

And inhales and exhales and holds his breath like a Yogi,

And gathers knowledge and meditates he and bathes at the pilgrim-stations :
And cooks his own food?, and touches not another, and abides in the woods:
But, if he Loves not the Lord, .

All that he does is vain and lasts not.

Than him is a Chandé]* more pious,

In whose mind Dwells the Lord of the earth. [J/6/

Shaloka

In the four directions do we wander, as is the Writ of Karma.
Nanak: we receive what is in our lot : Deliverance or Bondage, Pleasure or Pain. [J]

Pauri (Kakkid)

He, the Lord, is the Creator and the Cause,

And no one can erase His Writ.

He Does all but once and not again,

For, He the Creator, commits not an error.

Some He Shows the (True} Path,

And others He makes to.lose in the mazes to regret (in the end).
His Play He Himself Plays

‘And we Receive what He Himself Gives. [17]

Shaloka
Eating and Expending and Enjoying, the Lord's Treasure exhausts not,
And, Ninak, no end there is of those who Dwell on the Lord, [1]

Pauri (Khaki)

He, the All-powerful Lord, lacks in nothing. ;

And He Gives to all He Wills ; and one moves in His Will.

The Devotees have the Treasure of the Lord's Name to Expend,

And {hey gather Forgiveness and Humility and the Bliss of Equipoise, by Dwelling on the Treasure of
ood,

And they Spert with the Lord and are in immense Joy on whom is the Pleasure of the Lord.

And they are Ever-rich and Beauteous; yea, they, who treasure the Wealth of the Lord's Name.

They, on whom is the Lord's Grace, are never in Pain and are Punished not.

Nanak : he whom the Lord Loves, his Life is Approved. [Ja/

lL. fe, Maya. .
2. RH ura (Arras) : (Sans. taaqiiey), he who cooks his own food.
. 3. An untouchable, ,

Page 292 
Shaloka

All thinking leads one’s mind to this that this world forsure will pass away. . oP 254
(But) the desire for the perishable goes only through the Guru, when one Dwells on the Lord's Blissful
Name. [/]

Pauri (Gagged)

Utter thou the Praises of Govind, with thy every breath :

Trust not thy life, O friend, and so tarry not.

Neither in childhood, nor in youth,nor in age is one safe (from death) :

And one knows not when may the Fama'y Noose ensnare him.

When one sees the wise going, why knows not one that in this place no one can stay?
That what everyone leaves off, to it only the fools cling.

They, who, by the Guru's Grace, Dwell on the Lord through good Fortune,

Are Blessed, Nanak, for they are Wedded to no one but the Lord. [/9J

Shaloka

I have read through the Vedas and the Shastras, they speak of no one but the Lord,
For, the Lord is, and was since the beginning of Time, for ever, the only One alone. [1]

Pauri (Ghaghi)

Remember! this in thy mind that there is no one other than the Lord,
Neither any there was nor will be ; and here and there Pervades He alone.
When one seeks His Refuge, one’s mind is sated.
In the Kali age, the Lord's Name is the only efficacious (thing to Dwell upon),
One makes all kinds of efforts, and then regrets,
For, one attains not Peace without the Lord's Worship.
(But), he alone Tastes the God's Nectar, the Great Essence,
Who Receives, Nanak, the Lord through the Guru. /20/

Shaloka

The Lord has given us a fixed number of days : they increase nol, nor do they decrease by an iota.
Nanak : he, who wants to live in Doubt, lured by Attachment, is a fool among fools. [J]

Pauri (Ganedn)

Death is upon the heads of those whom God has made the worshippers of Maya.
For, they Realise not the All-pervading Lord and so are born to die again and again.
But he alone Receives Wisdom, and knows the way of Contemplation,

On whom is the Grace of the Lord.

On one’s own Account one is Saved not,

And the Earthen Pitcher (of the body) forsure will break.

He alone lives who Dwells on the Living Lord,

And for Him the Lord is hid not, and is Manifest in all, [2/]

Shaloka

Dwell in thy mind on the Lotus-Feet of the Lord that thy mind's inverted Lotus Blossoms forth ;
And then the Lord of Himself will Reveal Himself to thee, through the Guru’s Word®, [J]

Pauri (Chachi)

Blessed, Blessed is the day

When one’s mind rests upon the Guru's Lotus-Feet,

One may wander in all directions,

But one Sees the Lord only through(the Master's) Grace.
Then for him go all distinctions of the set code of conduct’,
And, in the Society of the Holy, his mind becomes Pure.
He loses his worrying and Sees he the One alone,

Who applies collyrium of Wisdom to his Eyes. [22]

i, wrasa (uretg) : fit, practise.
2. Mata (watt): the end or essence (nig) of Hz (wisdom or religion, ete.).
3. we fawe (art rare) : sara (conduct) and fegg-aas} (thought-power).

®

Page 29
Shaloka

His heart is at Peace, his mind in Poise, who’ sings the Lord's Praise. i
Bless Nanak also thus, O Lord, for, he is the Slave of Thy Slaves. /J)

Pauri (Chiachha)

We are Thy children, Thy Slaves, O Lord,
Nay, even the Slaves of Thy Slaves},

We are the Dust for the Saints’ Feet to tread upon : P. 255
Bless Thou us, O God, with Thy Grace.

] have shed all my cleverness,

And leaned on the support of Thy Saints.

(For), Qur body, the puppet of dust, obtains Salvation,

If Thy Saints, O Lord, are our Mainstay. [23]

Shaloka

Power swells our heads and we tyrannise over others, but false is the raiment of clay ;
For, Ego chains one's Soul, Nanak, and Deliverance is only through the (Lord’s) Name. [J]

Pauri (Jajji)

When a man has the pride of self,

He's caught as is a parrot in the hollow reed.

When a man has the pride of Wisdom and Devotion to God.
His efforts are of no avail in the eyes of the Lord,

He who thinks he discourses well,

Is like the pedlar who courses through the world (for others),
Nanak : he alone Receives the Lord,

Who sheds his Ego in the Society of the Saints. [24]

Shaloka
Rise early and Meditate on the Lord’s Name : Dwell on the Lord night and day.
Then you suffer not Sorrow and all your Woes depart. [JJ ‘

Panri (Jhajha)

Our Woes depart

If we Deal only in the Lord’s Name.

The worshipper of Maya dies in Sorrow,
| For, in his heart is the love of the Other.

rom our mind depart all thoughts of Error? and Sin,

And we Hear in the Society of the Holy the Song of Bliss.
Our Lust departs ; departs also the demon of Anger,
If, Nanak, the Lord’s Grace be upon us. [25]

! Shaloka

Try as well as one may, one stays not, O friend, : .
} One lives only if one Loves the Lord’s Name and Dwells ever on the Lord. [J]

Pauri (Janjan)

Know thou the truth that thy love of this (world) is false,
‘ And thete is no count of those who haye gone before thee.
Whose company can one cherish when all that is, will pass away 7
‘Know thou the truth that the false colour of Maya will wear’ off.
The Saints are those and they alone are Wise, who have cast off their Doubt.
On whomsoever is the Lord’s Pleasure, him the Lord takes out of the Blind Well.
For, He, the Lord, is Powerful and Does what He Wills.
Nanak : Praise’'thou that Lord, who has brought about thy Union with Himself. /26]

Shaloka
The bondage of birth and death breaks and one attains Peace by Serving the (Lord’s) Saints.
Nanak ;: forget not thy Lord, thy King, the Treasure of Good. [J]

1. wats (rite?) : the water-carriers.

2. BANS (etre) : sin.

Page 294 - . 
Pauri

Serve thou the One without whom there is naught : Fs
And let Him Dwell in thy body, mind and heart and on thy tongue.

And thou then Receivest what thou seekest,

But, thou Servest Him only if the Saint's Pleasure is upon thee :

And thou Abidest in the Society of the Satnts if the Lord's Grace is upon Thee.

] tumbled through all the worlds, but Peace is nowhere save in the Lord's Name.

He, who Abides in the Society of the Holy, is touched not by the Couriers of Death.

| am a Sacrifice unto the Saints myriads of times,

For (through them) are washed off my Sins of ages. [27,/

Shaloka
He, on whom is the Lord's Grace, is held up not at His Gate,
Nanak: Blessed is he whom the Lord Owns as His very Own, [J P. 256

Pauri (Thathd)

Break not they the heart of another,

Who give up all, and cling only to the One.

(But) they, who are involved in the meshes of Maya,

Get not Gladness from anything.

He, who Abides in the Society of the Holy, attains Peace,
And the Nectar-Name ; and his being is in Bliss.

He, on whom is the Pleasure of the Lord, Nanak,
Attains Peace of mind. /28/

Shaloka

A myriad times I bow to Thee, my All-Powerful Lord,
That my mind is held from its wanderings with Thy Hand of Mercy. [J]

Pauri (Daddi)

This (world) is not thy station : know then which is thy True world,
And know thou the Way to that world through the Guru’s Word,

One makes all efforts to build a home which goes not along with him.
But he knows the Way to the True Home if God's Grace he upon him.
One attains to the Eternal Home where the Holy congregate :

And then one wavers not on the Path. /29/

Shaloka

When the Dharmaraj@ demolishes thee, there is no one to make him stay his hand.
But they, Nanak, are Saved, who Dwell on the Lord and keep the Society of the Holy. [J}

Pauri (Dhadhi)

Why search Him without ? Search thy Lord in thy mind...

Why wander in the wilderness when He Abides within thee ?

Demolish the mound of thy wild Egocentricity, joining the Society of the Saints,

And attain Peace and Equipoise, and thou art Saved by the Sight of the Lord,

For, it is Ego that leads to birth and death and the woes of the womb.

And one is attached to pleasure of the senses, and in Ego, one comes and goes.

If one surrenders to the Lord and seeks the Refuge of the Saints,

One's shackles of Sorrow are sundered, and, Nanak, one Merges in the Being of the Lord. [30]

Shaloka (Says the Ange/ of Death):

“Where the Saints ever Worship the Lord and the Lord's Praise is Sung,
Thither repair not, O my Couriers, for there neither ye nor I shall be safe". [J]

Pauri (Nard)

He, who Conquers himself, Wins the battle (of life).

Glorious is he, who fights his Ego and his sense of Otherness.

He, who vanquishes his self and so Dies in life through the Perfect Guru's Word,

And Conquers his mind, Receives the Lord and is Decked with the Robes of a Warrior.

ee eee ee ee ee or

Page 295 | 
He, who considers nothing as his and leans only on the One God,
And Davells on the Infinite Puruska, night and day,

And makes his mind as Dust for others to tread upon,
And Realises the Lord’s Will. attains Peace, and Receives what is Writ in his Lot, /3J/

Shaloka

I am a Sacrifice unto him who Unites me with the Lord,
And my Fear and Doubt depart and the Yama eyes me no more, [I]

iT

Pauri (Tard)

Love thy Lord, the Treasure of all Good,

And Receive what is thy heart's Desire, thus bringing thee comfort.

Goes thy fear of the Yama's Path, if the (Lord's) Name Abides in thy mind, P, 257
And thou attainest the Perfect State and thy mind is Illumined and thou art Received at the Lord’s Court.
Thither go with thee neither riches, nor beauty, nor home, nor thy kingdom,

So Dwell thou on the Lord in the Society of the Holy : this alone is the True Deed.

When He, the Lord, Saves as from our Woes, there is no Sorrow for us,

For, the Lord, O Nanak, SuMains us of Himself, being our Father and Mother. [32]

Shaloka

The toil of the Evil-doers has worn them out, but their Desire gocs not, nor are they Content ;
They've gathered all goods, but do the goods keep them company for good? [J]

Pauri (Phat)

Nothing stays : why then dost thau spread thyself out and afar,

And deceivest others in a myriad ways to gather nothing but Illusion 7

Thou tirest thyself out, O fool, collecting a bagful of coins,

But these avail not thy mind when ends thy time.

Thou gatherest Peace (only) by Dwelling on Govind and receiving Instruction from the Saints,

And by Loving the One Lord, for, this alone is True Love.

He, the Lord, is the only Creator and the Cause : all strings are in His Hands.

Yoke me then as Thou Willest, my Master, for Thy creatures have no other Refuge but Thine, [33]

Shaloka

Thy Servants have Realised, O Lord, that Thou art the only Giver.
So Nanak Meditates on Thee with his every breath, and Thy Presence is his only Support. [1]

Pauri (Dacddi)

He, the Lord, is the only Giver : He Giveth to all,

And without limit : for limitless are His Treasures,

He, the Giver, is for ever Alive and Awake,

Why then hast thou, O my foolish mind, forsaken thy Lord ?
But whom shall we castigate for this,

When He, the Lord, Himself hath bound us to our desires 7
He whose Woes the Lord Himself ends,

Nanak, he the one is Content, by the Guru's Grace. 34}

Shaloka:

Have only the Support of the One, forsaking the support of another.
And, Dwell thou on the (Lord's) Name, O Nanak, that thy life is Fulfilled, [Jf]

Pauri (Dhedii)

My Wanderings cease when I find Peace in the Holy Congregation :

And, my mind is [lumined if Thou, my Master, Blessest me with Thy Grace.
Thy Wealth is the only True Wealth ; Thou art the only True King,

And to gather the Treasure of Thy Name is the only True Trade,

To him alone becomes his Glory and Peace,

Who Hearkens to Thy Praise, O our Lord and Master !

Says Nanak : He, in whose heart Dwells Thy Presence, by the Guru's Grace,
Attains Glory.and Magnificence." [35]

GuruGranth Sahib F209:

Page 296 . 
He, who Dwells within and without on the Lord's Name with Lov. : _
And receives Instruction from the Perfect Guru and Abides with the Ho'v. is Saved dom Mall, (2)

Pauri (Nanna)

Hell is not for him

Whose body and mind are permeated through with the Lord’s Name.

They, who Dwell on the Name, the Treasure of Good,

Are wasted not away by the slow poison of Maya.

They are denied nothing in life

Whom the Guru has Blest with the Mantram of the Name.

They who've gathered the (nine) Treasures of the Lord’s Nectar-Name, P. 258
Within, them, O Nanak, Rings the Unbeaten Melody (of the Word). [36

Shaloka’

The Guru-God has Saved my Honour and I have shed my Sins of Attachment and False show.
Let's then Meditate on Him, Nanak, of whose Glory there is no end.

Pauri (Pappa)

No one has found the limits of the Infinite Lord ;

Yea, His, who is the Saviour of the Sinners, Unfathomable and Deep.
Pure become myriads of Sinners.

Who Dwell on His Nectar-Name in the Society of the Holy.

And He, whom the Lord Protects,

Has his Vanity, False colour and Attachment washed off.

He, the Lord, is the Canopy that vaults over the kings ;

Know ye, Nanak, that there is no one other than Him. [37]

Shaloka ; .

Released are we from Bondage, our Wanderings cease, and we achieve Victory over our mind :
And Our mind is held and its Wanderings cease, if the Guru's Grace be upon us, [1]

Pauri (Phapha)

Coursing through life after life, man came in this world.

And in the Dark age found himself clothed with the precious human garment.
Know ye that this opportunity will return not :

Dwell then on the Lord’s Name that ye are Released from Bondage.

Ye shall come not, nor go, again,

If ye Meditate on the One and One alone.

Bless Nanak with Thy Grace, O my Creator-Lord,

And Unite him, the meek one, with Thyself. /38/

Shaloka

Hearken Thou to my Prayer, O Lord, the Protector of the poor,
And Bless Nanak with the Dust of the Saints’ Feet, for, in it lies all his Pleasure and Peace. f[J/

Pauri (Babba)

A Brahmin is he who Knows the mystery of Brafman, the Supreme Lord,

And a Vaishnava is he, who, through the Guru, imbides the Region of of Piety.
A Warrior is he who slays the Evil within himself, :

And then there is no other Evil for him to grapple with.

A man becomes a prisoner of himself,

And Jo, he blames others for his bondage.

I have shed all my cleverness, O my Lord, (to know Thee) ;

For, Thou art Revealed only to him on whom is Thy Grace. /39/

Shaloka

Dwell in thy mind on the Dispeller of Fear, the Slayer of Sorrow and Sin.
Nénak : he, whose heart bides with the Saints, his Wandering cease, [J]

2 se

Page 29
Pauri (Bhabha)

Cast off thy Doubt.

And know thou that this world is but a dream,

The gods and goddesses and angelic beings were !ured away by Doubt :

And the adepts too, and the ascetics and even Brahma, the god of gods.

The dreadful, impassable sea of Maya

Has cheated many humans of their wits.

But he, O Nanak, who sheds his Doubt and Fear and Attachment, by the Guru's Grace,
Attains the Supreme Bliss. [40]

Shaloka

One's mind wanders, lured by Maya, and yet it clings to it:
He, whom Thou Savest, O Lord, from seeking Maya, alone is Imbued with the Love of Thy Name, [J]

Pauri (Afammd)

How ignorant is the seeker who asks,
owing not that the Wise Giver is Giving even without asking.
He Gives all He has to, all at once,
Why then the crazy mind cries out to Him ?
And one asks not for God, but for goods,
Which bring gladness to no one.
O man, ask for nothing but the One alone, P, 259
That may Deliver thee of thy Bondage. 41]

Shaloka

Perfect is their intellect and they are the masters of the world,
In whose mind js the Mantram of the Perfect Guru. :
Nanak : they, who Realise their Lord, are of Perfect Destiny, [J]

Pauri (Mamma)

He, who has known the mystery (of life)

And has become Content on meeting the Saints,

Him pain and pleasure seem alike,

And he rises above the states of heaven and hell.

He looks upon God, the Perfect Person, as All+ ~pervading and yet Detached,
And he finds Peace in the Love of the Lord.

Him, Nanak, Maya contaminates not, /42]

Shaloka

Listen, O friend, there is no Release without the Lord.
Says Nanak : Our Bonds are sundered only if we hold fast to the Guru's Feet. [7]

Pauri (Yayya)

tthe tts

One tries in many Ways in vain,

(But), without the Lord’s Name, bow can one be Fulfilled ?

(For), the Way that leads to one’s Release,

Is known through the Society of the Saints. \

All of us want to be Released from Bondage, “,

But without Dwelling on Him, the Lord, who has ever been Freed ?
He, the Lord, alone has the Power to Save all :

Save me, the "worthless one, O Thou Lord of man !

He, Nanak, who Realises Him in thought, word and deed,

Has bis mind Awakened and Illumined, /43/

Shaloka

Be not cross with another : search th yself,
And become humble and meek : thus i is one Blest with the Lord’s Grace and Emancipated, [i]

Pauri (Rarz)

Be thou the Dust for all men to tread upon
And shed thy Ego that thy Doubt is dispelled,

BWVSOEECECOGOSOOSEHCOCOCOOPEOAOPOCOEOOCL CESS OOOSSAOOUCOCOSSOOCSOEE

.

Page 298 . 
Page 299

One can win the Battle in God's Eyes,
If one Dwells on the Lord's Name, through the Guru's Grace.

Then, by Practising good in life, one sheds all one's Sins,

And Dwells on the Perfect Guru's Infinite Word.

They, who are Imbued with the Lord's Name, with Love in their heart ;
Them, Nanak, the Guru-God Blesses with His Grace. [44]

Shaloka

Avarice, Falsehood and Sins and Afflictions infest our lives :
And, they alone are in Peace, Ninak, who through the Guru's Grace, Drink the Nectar of the Lord. {i

Pauri (Lalla)

Wherever we apply the Balm of the Lord's Name,

Pain and Woes from there depart in an instant.

He, who Cherishes in his heart (the Lord's Name), the Lord's Cure-all,
Him the Ailments touch not even in dream.

This Cure-all has its Seat in the hearts of all,

But it is Revealed not without the Guru's Grace,

The Perfect Guru shows the Way to discipline the mind,

And then, Ninak, there is no Pain forthe man, [45]

Shaloka

He, the All-pervading Lord, is all over : without Him, there is nought, ;
And He Keeps us company, Nanak, both within and without ; why thinkest thou Him afar? [JJ

Pauri (Fava)

Be thou not estranged from another,

For, in every heart Pervades the Lord.

The Lord is all over the land and the high seas,

But rare is the one who Sings His Praise, by the Guru's Grace.

Such a one remains not estranged from another,

Who Hearkens to the Lord's Praise by the Guru's Grace.

He rises above his colour and creed, .

Who Recites the Lord's Praise by the Guru's Grace. [46] P. 260

Shaloka

The Unwise worshippers of Maya, who first thought of their self,
Died in Pain like the one athirst, for such were their deeds. [7]

Pauri (Rard)

In the Society of the Holy is quietened the turbulence of one’s mind,

(And one knows that) the quintessence of all Karma and all religion is Meditation upon the (Lord's)
ame.

He, in whose heart Dwells the Lord of Beauty,

Ceases the turbulence of his mind.

The mind of the worshipper of Maya is ever in tumult,

For, his heart is the home of the evil of Pride.

But, the riotous mind is at Peace in a moment, Nanak,

If the Lord Reveals the Truth to our hearts. [47

Shaloka : ;

Seek thou the Refuge of the Holy, O mind, shedding all thy cleverness,
And Enshrine thou the Instruction of the Guru, and Fortune smiles on Thee. [1]

Pauri (Sassd)

TI surrender myself to Thee, O Lord ; I submit to Thee,

For, the Vedas, the Shastras and the Smirits speak of no one but Thee.
I have Jearnt this Wisdom after a great thought,

That one is Emancipated not, save by Dwelling on Thee,

We are ever in érror, O our King and Master,

But Thou art All-powerful, Indescribable and Infinite.

So take Thou Pity on Nanak who seeks Thy Refuge.

For, he, O Supporter of the earth, is Thy child. [48]

Guru-Granth Sati
Shaloka

' When one sheds enc's Ego, one is at Peace,
And one's body and mind are in Health.
And, one Sees one’s Lord,

Who is for ever to be Praised. [1]

Pauri (Khak/ni)

1 culogize only my Lord,

Who, in a rhoment, Fills up the Empty Vessels.

If a man, becoming Meek, surrenders himself to the Lord
And Dwells upon Him, the Lord of Nirvana, night and day,
Him the Lord Blesses with Peace, if He so Wills,

For, such is our Indescribable Lord.

He Forgives millions of Sins in an instant :

For, He, the Lord, Nanak, is for ever in Mercy. [49/

Shaloka

I speak the Truth to thee, O my mind, surrender thyself to thy Lord.
And shed all thy cleverness, and the Lord will Merge thee in Himself. [1]

Pauri (Sassa)

Shed all thy cleverness, O Ignorant one,

Neither command nor deceit please thy Lord.

One practises cleverness in a myriad ways,

But not one avails one in the end.

Dwell on Him alone, therefore, night and day,

That keeps thy Soul's company for ever,

He, Nanak, whom the Lord yokes to the Service of the Saints,
Him touches not Sorrow nor Pain.

cy
é
es
3
2)
Shaloka
Utter the Praise of the Lord with thy tongue ‘
And, Enshrining Him in thy mind, attain unto (the Lord's) Peace. -
(For), He, thy Lord, Pervades all, all over. [7] ;
4
a

Pauri

I see the Lord Filling all hearts,
This is the Instruction I received from the Guru's Word.

It has been since ever that the Lord Destroys our Sorrows,

He, who sheds his self, attains Bliss, for, where the self is not, the Lord is.

And it is to the Glory of the Saints that through them depart our Woes of birth and death,
He, who Enshrines the Beneficent Lord’s Name with Love,

And keeps the company of the Saints, on him is the Blessing of the Lord.

No one other than Him can do a thing,

For He, the Lord, O Nanak, Does all by Himself. [5J]

Shaloka

If Thou Judgest us, who are ever in Error, on our own Account, we are Saved not:
Forgive us, O Thou Forgiver of all, and Lead us across the Sea (of Existence). {J}

P. 261

Pauri

Tam a breaker of Faith, a Sinner, Ignorant and of little Wisdom :

For, I know not the Quintessence of the One who gave me Life and Happiness.

And I wander about in the ten directions to gather goods,

But J Enshrine not the Lord, the Giver, in my mind even for an instant.

assemble in my heart Greed and Falsehood and Sin and Attachment,

And J pass my time in the company of thiefs and traducers and sex-perverts.

But, when Thou so Willest, Q Lord, Thou canst Forgive the vicious with the virtuous =
And if such be Thy Will, even a Stone can Swim across the Sea (of Existence). /S52]

” *

Page 30
Shaloka
Eating, drinking and making lly I wandered through life after life.

Now [ lean on Thee alone, O Lord, take me out of the Sca (of Material Existence), /1/

Pauri

Playing the game of life, I suffered Pain, birth after birth. ; ;
And, then, I met with the Saint and my Pain ceased and the Word of the True Guru Merged in my being.

I then gathered Truth and Forgiveness and the Lord's Nectar-Name became my food,
And the Blessing of the Master was upon me and I abided in the Bliss of Peace,

I reaped much Profit from the Deal and I came back Home with Honour.

And there the Guru Blest me and I Met my Lord, the God.

He, the Lord, Does all by Himself: for, He alone is both here and Hereafter.

Praise be to the Lord who Dwells in all. [53]

Shaloka

I seek the Refuge of my Beneficent Lord of Mercy,
And [ am Blest, if even a syllable of His Name is Enshrined in my heart. [J]

Pauri

The three worlds of God are within the sway of the words,

Through the words do we discourse upon the Vedas.

And, the words Reveal what is writ in the Shastras, the Smritis and the Puranas,

And through words is the Yogi's Subtle Music and all the discourse,

Through the words, is told the Way to Deliverance and the thoughts of Fear and Doubt Revealed.
The words describe the way of piety, religion, action and reaction,

All that seems is under the sway of words,

Save the Transcendent Lord, who is above and beyond their reach. 34]

Shaloka

The Unknowable Lord's Pen Inscribes the Destinics of all beings on their Forcheads :
And He, of utter Beauty, then Pervades all, ‘ .

O Lord, Thy Praises | cannot Chime,

For, I am bewitched by the mere Sight of Thee.

Oh Lord, Sacrifice lam unto Thee. [J]

Pauri

© Thou, our Eternal, Transcendent Lord, O Thou, the Destroyer of Sin.

O Thou Perfect One Pervading ull, O Thou Slayer of Sorrow, O Thou Treasure of Virtue.

O Thou Formless, Absolute One, O my Companion, the Refuge of all.

O Thou, the Supporter of the earth, O Thou the Treasure of Good, O Thou of Discriminating Mind.

© Thou Transcendent Lord, Yonder of the yond, OQ my Master, who is and shall for ever be.

O Thou, the Eternal Friend of the Saints, O Thou, the Support of the supportless.

O Thou, our Lord, [ am Thy Slave without Virtue.

Bless me with Thy Name that I may weave it.into my heart. [55] P, 262

‘Shaloka

The Guru is the Mother, the Father, the God of gods, the Master. .

The Guru is the Mate, the Dispeller of Ignorance, the Kinsman, the Brother.

The Guru is Beneficent who Blesses us with the Lord's Name, by His Mantram is the mind held.

The Guru is the Embodiment of Peace, Truth & Wisdom, the philosopher's stone, whose touch turns all
into gold, and more, ; : _

The Guru is the Place of pilgrimage, the Poo! of Nectar, bathing in which brings infinite Wisdom.

The Guru is the Creator, the Destroyer of all Sins, Purificr of all Sinners. ~ - :

The ay is from the beginning of Time, through ages upon ages, by Dwelling on whose Mantram one is
Saved, aot ‘

The Lord Blesses us with the Society of the Guru that we, the Ignorant Sinners, are also Saved.

The Guru is the Transcendent Lord, the God of gods : Nanak salutes the Guru-God, [J/

. o JII37I90 Guru-Granth Sahib
Page 30

Gauri Sukhmani'’, M. 5
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Hnlightener.

Shaloka

I salute the One Primeval? Lord,
He, who was through the Ages,
He, who is the True One,

He, who is the God of gods. J)

Ashtapadi

Meditate thou on Him and attain Peace,
And thy woes and afflictions will depart.
Meditate thou on Him who Fills the Universe’
And Whose Name is uttered by myriads of creatures.
The Vedas, the Puranas and the Smiritis of Pure Word*
Are but the Creation of the One Name of the Lord.
He, whose heart He Blesses with a particle of His Name,
Of his praise, there is no limit; no count.
They, who crave only for Thy Vision, O Lord,
Save Thou Nanak along with them. [J]
The Nectar-Name of the Lord, the Harbinger of mind's Peace,
Is enshrined in the minds of the Devotees. /Pause]
Meditating on the Lord, thy Ego goes,
Meditating on the Lord goes the pain of the Yama.
Meditating on the Lord, the fear of Death departs.
Meditating on the Lord, thy enemy relents.
Meditating on the Lord, nothing disturbs thy Peace.
Meditating on the Lord, one is Awake night and day.
Meditating on the Lord, one sheds one’s fears.
Meditating on the Lord, thy worries go and thy woes.
Meditate thou on the Lord, in the Society of the Holy :
For, if thou Lovest thy Lord, thou art the master of all Treasures. [2/
Meditating on the Lord, one becomes a miracle-man, a master of nine Treasures.
Meditating on the Lord, one attains Wisdom, Concentration, Intellect, the Essence of things.
Meditating on the Lord, is the true Contemplation, Austerity and Worship.
Meditating on the Lord, one sheds the love of the Other
Meditating on the Lord, one bathes in Holiness.
Meditating on the Lord, one is Honoured at the Lord's Court.
Meditating on the Lord, one does what is good. :
Meditating on the Lord, one flowers and fruitions. P. 263
But, he alone Meditates on Him whom He, the Lord, Blesses,
And Nanak to the Feet of such a one clings. [3]
: Meditation on the Lord is the highest of deeds,
\ Meditating on the Lord, myriads are Saved.
: Meditating on the Lord, one's Thirst is quenched.
Meditating on the Lord, one becomes all-knowing.
Meditating on the Lord, Death dreads thee not.
Meditating on the Lord, thy Desires are fulfilled,
“Fy Meditation on the Lord cleans the scum of thy mind :
And the Nectar-Name comes into thy heart.
The Lord Resides on the tongue of the Saints :
Nanak is the Slave of them who Serve their Lord. [4]
1, Lit. the Jewel of Peace, or that which is Peace-giving to the mind.
2. offs aaa ayo (aif Tea THE) = BHO (BHAA, ercetings) to the Guru (9-2) who is since the beginning, Le,
God, Trumpp's remark that the Sanskrit “Gurve’ has been rendered as ‘Gur-e* by Guru Arjun due to his lack of the  _~
knowledge of Sanskrit is irrelevant as the Guru had no obligation while writing in Hindwi or the Gatha dialect to follow the
rules of Sanskrit grammar..

3. WH finigs (aq fate) —wn (fan), fatse (feq-+ya) : He who Pervades or Sustains the Universe.
4. yoga (@eregt) =F -+oia ; also, the nectar (gar) word (nfua),

Guru-Granth Sahib 9909999090909929999999909999%

Page 302 | 

|
;
:
a

[ 254 ]

They, who Meditate on the Lord, gather all the richness! (of Life),
They, who Meditate on the Lord, are Blest with Glory.

They, who Meditate on the Lord, are the ones Approved,

They, who Meditate on the Lord, are the First among beings.

They, who Meditate on the Lord, lean on no one but the Lord.

They, who Meditate on the Lord, are the Masters of all.

They, who Meditate on the Lord, dwell in Gladness.

They, who Meditate on the Lord, are immortalised for ever,

He alone Meditates on the Name, on Whom is the Lord's Grace,

And, Nanak, begs for the Dust (of his Feet). /5]

He, who Meditates on the Lord, does good to others.

He, who Meditates on the Lord, unto him I am a Sacrifice.

He, who Meditates on the Lord, his Face is Beauteous.

He, who Meditates on the Lord, passes his life in Peace.

He, who Meditates on the Lord, conquers his self.

He, who Meditates on the Lord, his conduct is Pure,

He, who Meditates on the Lord, attains immense Bliss,

He, who Meditates on the Lord, Abides in the Presence? of the Lord.
If the Saints Bless one, one's mind keeps Awake day and night.
Nanak : he alone Meditates on the Lord whose Destiny is Perfect. [6]
Meditating on the Lord, one’s Tasks are fulfilled.

Meditating on the Lord, one Grieves never.

Meditating on the Lord, one’s speech is replete with the Lord's Praise.
Meditating on the Lord, one Merges in Poise,

Meditating on the Lord, one’s Seat is move-less.

Meditating on the Lord, flowers the Lotus (of the Mind).

Meditating on the Lord, one Hears the Unstruck Melody (of the Word).
Meditating on the Lord : no telling of the Peace it brings.

But, they alone Meditate on the Lord on whom is His Grace,

Says Nanak : “I seek the Refuge of them, the Lord's Saints”. {7
Meditating on the Lord, the Devotees were Revealed (to the world),
Meditating on the Lord were the Vadas uttered.

Meditating on the Lord, one (truly) becomes an Adept, a Celibate, the man of Compassion.
Meditating on the Lord, even the low-boro are known the world over.
The Word of the Lord has become Manifest in the whole Creation.
Meditate thou, therefore, on the Lord, the Cause of causes.

Meditate on Him thou who Created all forms.

(For), through Meditation on the Lord is Revealed the Formless He.
He, whom the Lord Awakens (to His Mysteries),

To him alone, Nanak, is the Lord Revealed. /&—-J]

Shaloka

Thou, who art the Dispeller of the Pain and the Woes of the poor,
Thou, who Pervadest all Creation and art the Help of the helpless, P, 264
I seek Thy Refuge. Be, O Lord, ever with me. [J]

Ashtapadi

Where (in the Yond) there is neither mother, nor father, friend nor brother,
There, the Lord’s Name keeps thy Company.

Where there is utter Wilderness and the Couriers of the Yama grind thee down,
There, the Lord's Name alone goes along with thee,

Where there is nothing but utter distress for thee,

There, the (Lord's) Name of the Lord Saves thee in a moment.

All works we dot to expiate for our sins save us not,

But the Name of the Lord Washes off myriads of Sins.

Dwell on the Lord's Name, O my mind, through the Guru,

And thus, Nanak, attains ue. “*ace, J

1, Not ‘riches, as is commonly translated.

2. Lit. near,

3, Not ‘renowned’, as the term is oftem .- * sd.

4. Ysa ves (Faq aer) ; (Sans. qey-areen), (Le, pious conduct,

Page 30
Unhappy is the monarch of the whole world,
But he, who Meditates on the Lord's Name, is ever in Joy :

One's millions hald one in their bondage’,

But if one Dwells on the Lord's Name, one is Saved.

One revels in the myriad joys of Maya, but his Thirst is quenched not :
But, if one Meditates on the Lord's Name, one is satiated.

The Way (in the Yond) which one treads alone,

There, the company of the Lord's Name is one’s cool comfort.

Such a Name thou must Reflect upon,

And thus attain to the state of Bliss, [2]

One is Saved not by millions of (friendly) arms,

But, if one Dwells on the Lord's Name, one is Saved.

Where myriads of crosses assemble to destroy us,

There the Lord’s Name Saves us in an instant.

If one is circling the Round of births and deaths,

By Dwelling on the Lord’s Name one finds eternal Rest.

We are impure ; impurity leaves us not ;

But the Lord’s Name destroys millions of Sins.

Meditate thou with Love on such a Name,

Which one finds in the Society of the Saints. [3]

The journey of whose length there is no measuring,

There, the Name of the Lord is one’s Eats :

The Journey upon-which one goes in utter Darkness,

There, the Lord's Name 1s one’s Light.

The Way (in the Yond) on which no one knows thee,

There, the Name of the Lord is thy Recognition.

Where in utter Wilderness there is Heat and Fire,

There the Lord’s Name is thy (only) Shade.

Where, (in the Yond) Thirst tears thy mind,

There, O Nanak, the Lord's Nectar rains upon thee. [4]

The Devotees Expend nothing but the Lord's Name,

Yea, the Name that Resides in the minds of the Holy.

The Lord’s Name is the Devotee’s only Refuge :

For, through the Lord's Name were myriads Saved.

The Saints Praise no one but the Lord, day and night,

And apply (io their Ailments) the Cure-all of the Lord's Name.

The Lord's Name is the only Treasure with the Lord’s Own :

For, them the Lord has Blest (with His Name).

Their minds and body are imbued with the Lord’s Love:

And so their Minds, Nanak, are IIIumined and Awake. [5]

The Lord's Name is the key to one’s Deliverance and the Way ;

The Lord's Name is one’s (true) food and drirk :

The Lord's Own wear the form and colour of the Lord's Name ;

If one Dwells on the Lord, nothing doth him shake.

Yea, the Lord’s Name brings Honour to His Slave.

The Lord’s Name is his only Glory,

The Lord's Name is for him the only Joy, the Yoga true, P. 265
And Dwelling on it, there is no Separation for him.

(For), the Lord's Own are ever Imbuwed with the Service of the Lord's Name.
So, Nanak Worships his Lord, the only God. 6]

The Lord is the Treasure for the Lord’s Own.

Yea, them the Lord Dispenses this Wealth, of Himself.

The Lord is the Powerful Refuge of the God's Servant,

And he looks upto no one else by God's Grace.

Through and through? is he imbued with His Name :

And he sits ina Trance,* steeped in Joy. :
He Dwells on the Lord, day and night, .
And his Glory is thus Revealed to the world.

I. The line.is #lso read as “gry adal da & ua" (ara watt ag a 72), }¢., the mindis held not by gathering millions.

2. Lit, warp and woof.

3. Am AMtiq (a4 Warf) ; The Lord's Primordial Trance when He was in His Absolute State, ie, before He
created the Creation.

GuruGronth Subib 9900209202999992999900209999099999090222990900004

Page 30

Page 305

[ 256 ]

The Lord's Worship redeems myriads of men :

With the Lord's Servants many more are Saved, [7]

The Lord's Name is the Elysian tree,

Dwelling on the Lord's Name, ts to get Fulfilled! :

The highest (Bliss) is in the telling of the Lord's Name :

If thou hearest the Lord's Name, thy Pain and Woes depart.
Only the Saint's heart knows the value of the Lord’s Name,
By whose Grace all one’s Sins are washed away.

By great good luck one enters the Society of the Saint,
Through whose Service, one Dwells on the Lord's Name.
Nothing, O nothing, there is that equals the Lord's Name :
(But) he, who Receives the Lord’s Name, Nanak, rare is he, [8-2]

Shaloka

Many Shastras I Searched through and Smrilis too,
They equal not the Name of the Lord, for, ‘invaluable i is the Lord's Name. [J]

Ashtapadi

All thy meditation, austerity, knowledge and concentration,

The discourse on the six Shastras, and the Smiritis,

The discipline of Yoga, the way of works,

Renunciation and wandering about i in the woods,

And all kinds of works done,

And deeds of charity and piety and oblations to the sacred fire,

And cutting up of the body and offering each bit as a Sacrifice (to the gods),
And keeping of fasts and other deeds of merit ;

These, O all these, equa] not Meditation on the Lord’s Name,

Nanak : through the Guru, Dwell thou then on the Lord's Name for once. fi]
If one scans the nine divisions of the world and lives long,

And becomes a great ascetic, Dwelling on sadness ;

And offers his life to the fire :

And gives away gold, horses, clephants and lands in charity,

And practises the inly washings,’ the Yogic postures,

And, like a Jaina, disciplines himself with practices hard,

And gets himself cut up, bit by bit,

(But, alas!) the Dirt of his Ego departs not.

Nothing, O nothing, equals the Name of the Lord.

Nanak : Meditate thou on it, by the Guru’s Grace, that thou art Saved, [2]
If one’s mind is torn by Desire and one’s life ends at a holy place,

The ego and pride of his self go not from his mind,

Even if one washes? one’s body day and night,

One's mind is cleansed not of its Dirt,

One may discipline one’s body the hard way,

But one rids not thus the mind of Maya.

One may wash the mortal frame as well as one may,

But, can the wall of mud be washed clean ?

‘O my mind, great is the Glory of the Lord’s Name,

For, the Lord’s Name has Saved many a Sinner, [3]

Be not clever with thy Lord, for thus one lives ever in the fear of Death.

Do what one may, one’s Desire is satiated, not, . BF. 266
Wear what coat one will, one's Fire is quenched not.

Apply what remedy one would, one attains not to the Lord,

Repair thou to the skies or the nether regions, there is no escape for thee from Maya.
And, Attachment ensnares thee in its net.

All other Works does the Fama punish,

And accepts nothing save the Lord’s Worship.

Meditating on the Lord’s Name, all one’s Woes depart.

Nanak says this with a coor wis“ and heart. [4]

1. Lit. to receive Xamadhenu, (the milch-cow of the gods which is believed to fulfil all desires). ,

2. fatel aan (feet sor) : a You!* oractice for cleansing the body from within.

3. a (HiT) ; cleansing ; purifying. He, > * -ans bathing, not reflection, as the following line makes abundantly
4. mafia nate (agi gure) : fit. with natural ease.

20 Guru-Granth Sabib
If one seeks the four kinds of cardinal boons',
Let him Dedicate himself to the Service of the Saints.
If one secks to cast one's Woes away,
Let him Sing ever the Praises of the Lord in his heart.
If one seeks Honour for oneself,
Let him forsake Ego, joining the Society of the Holy.
If one dreads the pangs of birth and death,
Let him seek the Refuge of the Saints.
He, who Seeks to See the Sight of the Lord,
Nanak is a Sacrifice unto him. [5]
He the one alone is supreme among beings,
Whose Ego goes in the Society of the Holy.
He, who takes himself to be the lowest of the lowly,
He alone is the highest of the high.
He, whose mind is humble like the dust,
He alone Worships the Lord in his heart.
He, who casts away the evil of his mind,
He alone will look upon the whole creation as his friend,
He, who looks alike upon pleasure and pain ;
He, Nanak, rises above and virtue, and sin. /6]
For the poor, Thy Name is the only Wealth.
For the shelterless, Thy Name is the only Refuge.
For the humble, Thine, O Lord, is the only pride.
For, Thou Givest to all alike,
Thou art the Doer and He that Causes all to be done,
Thou art the Knower of our inner-selves,
- (But), Thou Thyself alone Knowest Thyself,
And Thou Thyself art Imbued with Thyself.
Thou alone canst Praise Thyself :
For, no one other than Thee knoweth Thee. [7]
Of all religions, this one is the purest ;
That one Meditates on the Lord's Name and does what is Holy.
This, indeed, is the noblest of the works :
That one Washes the Evil of the mind associating with the Saints.
Of all efforts, this effort is the noblest ;
That one Meditates on God in the heart ever and for evermore.
Of all speech, that one is the finest
Through which one listens to the Lord's Praise, and utters with the tongue.
Of all places, that is one the most Blessed,
Where, Nanak, one Dwells on the Lord’s Name. [8-3]

Shaloka

O thou without Merit, O ignorant one, take thou to thy Lord. ,
And, keep Him in thy thought who made thee ; for He alone lasts with thee. [J]

Ashtapadi

O life, Dwell on the Merits of the All-pervading Lord

Who has Made thee so Beauteous from a mere seed.

He, who Built thee, Decked thee,

And Sheltered thee in the fire of the womb ; ;

He, who brought thee thy mother’s milk in thy childhood, :

He, who brought thee the bloom of youth and delicious foods and immense pleasures ;
He, by whose Grace thy kins and friends succoured thee in age,

And fed thee in thy bed.

This man, without merits, knows not Thy Virtues, O Lord, P. 267
Forgive him, OQ Thou Gracious One, that he be Saved. [J]

By whose Grace, one enjoys-in Peace on the earth,

And revels with his sons, brothers, friends and wife ;

1, Diarma (Righteousness or moral duty), Aria (Worldly weal), Xema (Sex), and Moksha (Deliverance). .
Page 306 

By whose Grace one drinks fresh and cool water,

And breathes the life-giving air and enjoys the precious warmth of fire,
By whose Grace one enjoys all joys,

And lives with all his treasures,

He who gave thee hands, feet, cars, cyes, tongue ;

Why, O life, hast thou forgotten Him and livest with another ?
Such is the ignorance of this wild fool, O Lord,

Pull him Thou out of the mire, of Thyself. 2)

He, who is the Saviour of all from beginning to end:

Him the ignorant one loves not.

From whose Service he attains the nine Treasures,

Him the fool remembers not.

The Master, whose Presence is ever-present,

Him the Blind thinks afar.

From whose Service he receives Honour at the Lord’s Court,
Him the unwise one forsakes.

Forgive him, O Thou Infinite Lord of Mercy,

For, he falls into Error, ever and for evermore. [3

He, who gives up the Jewel and hugs the trite,

He, who gives up the Truth and hugs falsehood,

He, who believes in the permanence of the impermanent,

He, who thinks afar what is to happen in the near,

He, who struggles for what he leaves off,

He, who forsakes that which is to keep him company,

He, who washes off the plaster of the sweet-smelling Chandan,
And like a donkey rolls in dust,

He, the Fallen one, who abides in the blind Darkness of a Well,
Nanak (prays): “Take him out into the Light, O Thou Lord of Merey !" [4]

He, whose nature is of an animal, the caste of man,

He, who goes about humbugging with this and that,

He, who wears the coat (of the holy), and in the miod has the Dirt of Maya,
He can hide not his deeds, howsoever he tries.

From without, he bathes, meditates and gathers knowledge,
(But) within him barks the Dog of Avarice.

He, who has the fire within, will have the ashes without.
How can he swim across with a halter around his neck ?

He, in whose mind Dwells He, the Lord,

He alone, Nanak, Merges in the Peace of Equipoise. {5
By hearing alone, how can the blind one find his path ”

But, if he holds another's hand, he reaches safe.

How shall the deaf one hear the soft talk 7

He understands ‘day’, when one utters ‘night’. ‘

How shall the dumb one recite the Song of the Lord ?

Even if he tries, his voice fails him.

How ¢an a cripple scale a mountain ?

Nay, he cannot go up there in the heights.

O God, the Lord of Mercy!, thy humble Servant prays Thee:
“Save Nanak Thou by Thy Grace”. /a/

He, who is ever with us, Him we forget,

And, he, who is foreign to us, him we love.

One lives in the castle of sand,

And plays with Maya, and revels,

And believes in the Illusion as true ;

And lo, one remembers not death,

Gripped by Enmity, Lust, Anger, Altachment,

Falsehood, Evil, Guile and Maya,

One passes through many lives. P, 268
Nanak prays : “‘O Lord, Save him (too) by Thy Grace’, [7]
Thou art the Master, to Thee | pray, O Lord !

For, this life and body are Thy Gifts, Thy Bounties.

1. age (#21) : (Sans. eq) full of compassion.

Page 30
Thou art the Father, the Mother ; we are Thy children :

In Thy Grace lies our whole Jov.

No one knoweth Thy limits, O Lord,

Thou, the Maker of our Destiny, art the Highest of the high.

All Thy Creation is strung on Thy Thread :

And, all thar Thou Createst is in Thy Command.

Thou alone Knowest Thy end and state :

So, Nanak, Thy Servant, is for ever a Sacrifice unto Thee. [8-4]

Shaloka

Thou, O man, hast given up thy Benefactor and taken to other deeds,
But nothing avails thee : without the Lord’s Name, thy Honour is lost. [JJ

Asbtapadi

One puts ten things behind,

And if one gets not another, one loses one’s faith’,

If the Lord Gives not another, and takes away even those He hast Blest thee with,
Then what can one do, O fool ?

Salute then Him, thy Lord, for ever,

For, He is Master, before whom we are helpless.

He, in whose heart Dwells the Sweet Lord,

Into his mind comes the All-embracing Peace.

He, who walks in His Will,

He, forsooth, gathers all the Treasures of life. [1]

The King Bestoweth His limtitless Gifts,

And one enjoys them in Joy and Peace.

If He takes back the things we hold in trust,

It is the fool alone who grieves.

For, thiswise, the Lord loses His trust in him, :
And never believes him again.

Surrender then to Him all that belongs to Him

And submit to His Will:

And thy God will then Bless thee four times more,

For, He is for ever the Lord of Mercy. [2/

All thy love of Maya is surely the love of Illusion ;

For the (sense-pleasures) pass off forsooth,

Why, O why, thou lovest the passing shade of the tree,

For, it goeth soon and thou comest to grief.

All that seems, passes away ;

Why then this thy love of Darkness ?

He, who loves a wayfarer,*

What is it that he gets from him who comes only to pass away.
© my mind. the love of the Lord's Name alone bringeth Peace,
(But) if the Lord Blesseth thee, then alone lovest Him thou, /7/]
False is the love of the body, wealth, family, all ;

False are Ego, Maya, and Attachment :

False are the possessions of beauty, riches, goods,

False are the Lust and Anger wild,

False the chariots, elephants, horses, raiments,

False is the love of Maya which pleases thee.

False are Guile, Attachment and Ego,

False is the pride of self.

True only is the Meditation one practises in the Sanctuary of the Saints.
So Nanak lives by Dwelling on the Lord's Feet. [4]

Evil are the ears that hear slander,

Evil the hands that grab what belongs to another.

Evil the eyes that see the beauty of another's bride, P.269
Evil the tongue that tastes other (than God).

1. faufe (fwaiifz) : (fa, without; G2, cunning), Ae. cunninglessness or purity of faith,
2, aed (aeTH) = erg : he, who gocs on ihe road (gr),
Evil the feet that go out to commit evil,

Evil the mind that craves for the Other,

Evil the body that does not good to another.

Evil the smell that issues forth from evil.

Without Wisdom, all that seems is false ;

Blessed is the body, Nanak, that Utters ever the Name of the Lord. [5/
Vain is the life of a Shakra® :
For, how can one be Pure without Truth?

For else, one’s mouth smells not sweet,

Wain are the days and nights that pass without the Lord’s Name,
As the crop withers away wilhout the rains.

Save Meditation all work is vain,

Like wealth that lies in vain with a miser.

Blessed, Blessed, are they in whose heart Dwells the Lord's Name :
Nanak is a Sacrifice unto them. [6}

Man appears in one way and lives in another,

He loves not from the heart ; but talks tall,

The Wise [nner-knower of all, Knows all,

And is impressed not by the outer show. ,

He, who instructs others (in the Way), but follows it not himself
Is always on the Round ; he comes and goes.

He, in whose heart Dwells the Lord,

With his Instruction is Saved the whole world.

They, whom Thou Lovest, O Lord, alone know Thee :

Let Nanak's mind be fixed upon their Feet. [7]

I pray to my Lord, but He Knows all.

For, He Honours whomsoever He makes His own.

But, He alone of Himself Determines,

To whom He shall seem near, to whom afar.

Receive Him thou without cleverness, without special effort,

For, He Knows what is the nature of our souls.

He Unites to Himself whomsoever He Pleases :

(For), it is He, who Fills all places with Himself.

He alone Serves Him on whom is His Grace,

Meditate then, Nanak, on Him always and for ever more. [8-3]

Vain and Blind is the body without the Lord's Name.
A)

Shaloka

May my Lust, Anger, Avarice, Attachment and Ego depart :
O Lord, I seek Thy Refuge ; Bless me with Thy Grace, [ij

Ashtapadi

SSS

ce,

By whose Grace we eat delicacies,

Wear Him ye in the mind,

By whose Grace we apply scents to our body,

Meditate ye on Him to attain the State of Bliss.

By whose Grace, we live in the abode of Peace, ‘
Reflect ye on Him in the mind for ever.

By whose Grace we abide in the pleasure-haunts,

Utter ye His Name with the tongue night and day,

By whose Grace we enjoy love and fineries of life :

Nanak : Meditate on Him who alone is worthy of Worship. [J]
By whose Grace we wear silks,

Why, O why leave Him off and love another?

By whose Grace, we sleep on the cosy bed,

Why not Meditate on Him night and day.

By whose Grace we are honoured by all, P. 270
Recile ye only His Name with the tongue and the mouth,

|. Ria (apa) : Literally rendered, it would mao the worshipper of power (Shakri), Here, it refers to the Hindu
Tantric secl worshipping the female principle through many evil practices.

Be Oe 9 9289233239 2O2R90 @uru-Granth Subib

S GCOSSSOGOCOOSSESOPOCOSCCOS

Page 30
€

By whose Grace one keeps one’s Faith,

Dwell on Him, O my mind, He is thy only God!.

If one Recites His Name, one is well Received at the (Lord’s) Court.
And, Nanak, one goes.to one’s (True) Home with Honour, {2/

By whose Grace we have a healthful, golden body,
Keep ye attached to that Lord.

Whose Grace is the only Refuge of our shame,
Repeat ye His Praises and attain Peace.

Whose Grace at all times covers up all our Sins,
O my mind, fall at the Feet of that Lord.

By whose Grace no one can rival thee,

Remember Him each moment, thy Great God,

By whose Grace one obtains one’s precious body,
Nanak, Call on Him, (the God of gods). [3]

By whose Grace we are bejewelled,

Why laze in Meditating upon Him, O my mind ?

By whose Grace, we have horses and elephants to ride,

O my mind, why forget that Lord, our only God,

By whose Grace, one gathers wealth; land, gardens and all,
Why not keep Him weaved in our heart, always and for ever.
He, who Created thee, O my mind,

Call on Him ever, downsitting and upstanding.

Call on Him, who is the One Unknowable :

And He shall Save thee both here and Hereafter. [4]

By whose Grace one has enough to give away in charity,
Night and day Remember Him, O my mind !

By whose Grace one is a man of culture’,

Call only on Him with each breath.

By whose Grace one has a Beauteous face,

Remember Him ever, the Fount of incomparable Beauty,
By whose Grace one is cast among the noble kind?.
Forget not Him, night or day, nay never.

By whose Grace one Keeps one’s honour,

Utter only His Praise, by the Guru's Grace. [3]

By whose Grace our ears have music to hear;

By whose Grace our eyes see the world’s wonders,

By whose Grace our tongue is sweet of speech,

By whose Grace we abide in pleasure and peace.

By whose Grace our hands move and work,

By whose Grace we flower in bloom,

By whose Grace we attain the State of Bliss,

By whose Grace we Merge in the All-embracing Peace :
Why forget that Lord and take to another ?

Nanak : by the Grace of the Guru, awaken thy mind to Him, thy only God. [6]
By whose Grace we are known the world over :

Forget not ever that Lord from thy mind,

By whose Grace we attain Glory,

O my ignorant mind, ever Call thou on Him.

By whose Grace all our Works are accomplished,

Keep His Presence ever before thy mind.

By whose Grace we find the Truth,

Attune thyself to Him, O my mind !

Eg Sg el

OSS

1. age (ae) : (Sans. exe), Lit. would mean ‘only’. See Yoga Sutra I, 55. “Kaivalya is attained when there is
equality io point of purity between Parusha aad Sarva", aaron : gfearer @aeafafa i 31yxi
Alsa see section ibid, [¥, 34+: “The recession to their origin of the Gunas, void of the motive to act for the Purusha
is Xoivalya; or it 1s the soul coming by its own’’. It thus would, mean ‘detached’.
{erat pat wlasre : toed eretsfesr at falaafeafefs vi yvn
2. omera faesral (srare farsgrét) : wrgra, culture; fagord] : practiser of ; dealer in.
3. wifs (arta) or Aral (are) is not caste, but species or kind,

HA GSASCCCECOCHCHGESSCSSOOCOCECECSCECCCCCECESESEEECEGSSCOCESSSESOSESOSS

'
bh
g

Page 310 
By whose Grase, we attain Salvation, ,

Meditate thou on Him, He, the One alone. 7,

Meditate on that Name which He, the Lord, Bids. -
Sing that Praise of the Lord that removes thy Ego, P. 271
And by the Lord's Grace one gets Light,

And the Lotus (of the mind) flowers.

By the Lord's Grace, He Comes into our mind.

By the Lord's Grace, our intellect becomes Pure.

ByThy Grace, O Lord, do all Treasures come to Thy man.

For, of himself, the man gets not a thing.

Sayeth Nanak : Thy men act as Thou Willest, O Lord.

For, in their own hands Jies, nay, pot a thing’, /&-6]

Shaloka

Unknowable, Beyond limit, is the Lord,

He, who utters His Name, is Saved.

Listen, thou friend, Nanak prays thee,

To the wonderful story of the Saints (who ever Call on the Lord). [J]

Ashtapadi

In the Society-of the Saints, one’s face becomes Pure ;

And, one washes off all one’s Dirt.

And, one sheds one’s Ego,

And, Wisdom is Awakened in him.

In the Society of the Saints, one finds the Lord near.

And, all one’s woes depart.

One attains to the Jewel of the Lord’s Name,

And, one goes only the Lord’s Way.

Ob who can tell the praise of a Saint :

For, the praise of the Saint equals the Praise of the Lord. [J]

In the Society of the Saints, one comprehends the incomprehensible,
And, one’s (inside) flowers.

And, one disciplines one’s Five (Desires),

And, one Tastes the Nectar of the Lord’s Name.

In the Society of the Saints, one becomes humble like the dust,

And, one’s speech becomes sweet.
‘In the Society of the Saints, one’s mind is held,

And, one gets the Peace of mind.

In the Society of the Saints, one is contaminated not by Maya :

He, who keeps the Society of the Saints, on him is the Lord's Pleasure. f2}
In the Society of the Saints, one’s adversaries become friends,

And, one becomes Purest of the Pure.

In the Society of the Saints, one is the enemy of no one,

And, one goes not astray.

In the Society of the Saints no one seems evil,

And, one knows the Lord of the Highest Bliss.

In the Society of the Suints, the scourge of selfhood departs,

And one sheds one’s Ego.

The Lord alone Knows the Glory of the Saints : :

For, the Lord and the Saints, Nanak, are at one with each other. [3]
In the Society of the Saints, outgoes not one’s mind,

And, one gets clernal Peace.

In the Society of Saints, one comprehends the incomprehensible,

And, bears (cheerfully) the unbearable,

In the Society of the Saints, one abides in the highest State (of Bliss),
And, attains to the Castle (of the Lord).

In the Society of the Saints, one learns the lesson of Faith,

And, Deals only with the One Lord.

In the Society of the Saints, one Receives the Treasure of the Lord’s Name,
Oh, Nanak is a Sacrifice unto the Saints. [4]

229 Guru-Granth Salih

Page 31
In the Society of the Saints, one Saves one’s kindreds,
And, one’s associates are redeemed.

In the Society of the Saints, one attains the kind of wealth

That satisfies all, all over.

In the Society of the Saints, even the Lord of death comes to serve thee,
And the angels sing thy praise.

In the Society. of the Saints, one’s Sins are Washed off,

And, one Sings the sweet Praises of the Holy Lord.

In the Society of the Saints, one reaches all the reaches* (of the mind),
And, one's life becomes fruitful. [5] P, 272
In the Society of the Saints, hard is not one’s toil,

For, one is Saved by the mere Sight of the Saints.

In the Society of Saints, one sheds one’s Sins,

And, one shakes off Hell :

Here, Hereafter, one is easy at heart, P

And one Meets with the Lord, Separated from him,

And one’s life passes not in vain,

And one receives what one longs for.

For, the Lord Abides in the hearts of the Saints.

Nanak : Saved is the man who hears the Lord’s Name from the Saint's tongue, [6]
In the Society of the Saints, hear thou the Lord's Name.

In the Society of the Saints, Utter thou the Lord’s Praise.

In the Society of the Saints, one forsakes not the Lord from the mind.
In the Society of the Saints, one is Saved forsure,

In the Society of the Saints, the Lord seems sweet,

And, one Sees one’s God in every heart.

In the Society of the Saints, one submits to the Lord’s Will.

And, one is eternally Delivered.

In the Society of the Saints, all one’s Woes depart.

But, the Saints, O Nanak, are met with by True Destiny®. [7]

The Vedas know not fully the Merits of the Saints:

They tell only what their composers had heard.

The Praise of the Saints is beyond the three Mades :

Yea, the Glory of the Saints Pervades all through.

No end there ts to the Glory of the Saints :

Yea, the Glory of the Saimts is beyond limits.

The Glory of the Saimts is highest of the high.

The Glory of the Saints is most Magnificent.

To utter the Praise of the Saints fits a Saint alone :

Says Nanak : there is nothing to tell God from a Saint. [8-7]

Shaloka

He, whose mind and mouth are filled with Truth,
He, who Sees no other but the One Lord,
Such, Nanak, be the qualities of the Wise of the Lord. [J

Ashtapadi

The Wise of the Lord*-is for ever unattached,

Like the lotus that abides detached in water.

The Wise of the Lord is free of evil,

Like the sun that warms every one alike,

The Wise of the Lord looks upon all alike

Like the wind that waves alike for the beggar and the king.

1. uals (varga) : (Sans. (vrraq), running away, flight, escape.

2. ma ats dify (aa qa afa) : Cf By Stayanta og the relation between the body and Aakatha, as also by.the coal-
esceoce (of the mind) with light (things like) cotton, (there follows) passage through space. (Yoga Sutra, H!, 42),

HOUKTT | AT TATE TEL TAT PTET TAT Rey ‘

3. itn (ort): CLM. junction) “is ths cause of the self-recognition of its pawer as well as of its Lord's’. Yaga

Sure, 23. eerie : eaeiivaerg 2 alt nea
4. ao4faal Copy Prardt), fe., he, who has the knowledge of Srafman, the God-conscious being.

Page 31
The Wise of the Lord has even patience, ;

Like the earth is to the digger and the one who plasters it with the scented paste.

The Wise of the Lord has Merits e.
Like fire whose poised nature is to warm all alike. {JJ

The Wise of the Lord is the Purest of the Pure,
Like water which gathers not dirt to itself.

The Wise of the Lord is Ilumined in mind,

Like the (clear) blue sky that vaults over the earth.
The Wise of the Lord treats the friend and foe alike,
(For), the Wise of the Lord has lost his Ego.

The Wise of the Lord is the highest of the bigh,
But he, in his mind, is the lowliest of the lowly,
Burt, he alone gathers the Wisdom of the Lord,

On whom is the Lord's Grace. [2]

The Wise of the Lord is humble like the dust,

(Yet), the Essence of the Self only the Wise of the Lord knows.

The Wise of the Lord is merciful to all,

For, the Wise of the Lord can do no evil.

The Wise of the Lord looks upon all alike:

And, sheds Nectar from his eyes. P. 273
The Wise of the Lord has his Fetters cut off, ,
And, he follows the Way of the Pure.

The Wise of the Lord eats and drinks Wisdom (of the Lord)

And, Calls upon no one but God alone. [3]

The Wise of the Lord leans on the One alone,

And, becomes immortal and eternal.

The Wise of the Lord gathers Poverty in his mind,

And, seeks pleasure in doing good.

The Wise of the Lord is free of shackles.

And, holds he his wandering mind.

The Wise of the Lord does only what is Holy.

And fruitions in Good.

In the company of the Wise, all are Saved,

Nanak : on the Wise of the Lord, the whole world Dwells. [4]

The Wise of the Lord Loves the One alone,

With the Wise of the Lord Abides the Lord, the One,

The Wise of the Lord has the Refuge of the Lord's Name,
Yea, the Lord’s Name is his only Kim.

The Wise of the Lord is Awake for ever ;

And, sheds he the Ego of the mind.

The Wise of the Lord lives in the highest Bliss :

And Bliss pervades his home for ever.

The Wise of the Lord abides ever in the Poise of the Soul,
Oh, the Wise of the Lord dies never, [5]

The Wise of the Lord knows well his God,

And loves he the One alone,

The Wise of the Lord is care-free (like the Lord),

And the Instruction he gives is the Purest of the Pure.
He, whom the Lord Makes Wise in Himself,

Great is the Glory of such a one,

The Wise of the Lord is seen by True Destiny,

Oh, | am a Sacrifice unto the Wise of the Lord.

(Even) the god of gods! seeks out the Wise of the Lord :
Nanak : he who's Wise in God is the God Himself, /6]

Beyond value is the Wise of the Lord,

For, al] that is, is contained in his Mind.

Who at all can find his mystery ?

Salute, then, the Wise of the Lord, O ye men !

3 . l. Madea (Reqe), Le. AO—ega, Shiva, god of gods,
9-9-9999 993 9227937339722290 Gurn-Granth Salih

Page 31
No one can praise well the Wise of the Lord,

For, the Wise of the Lord is the Master uf uil.

Oh, who can find the limits of the Wise of the Lord,

His state only the Wise of the Lord can know.

Infinite, beyond comprehension, is the Wise of the Lord ;

Nanak salutes the Wise of the Lord for ever. [7]

The Wise of the Lord is the Creator of the universe :

The Wise of the Lord Lives for ever.

Through the Wise of the Lord, one attains True Life and the Way to Release.
The Wise of the Lord is the Perfect Man, the Architect of our Destiny.

The Wise of the Lord is the Shelter of the shelterless,

Yea, the Wise of the Lord gives support to all,

The whole universe of form belongs to the Wise ;

For, the Wise of the Lord is the Absolute Lord Himself, P, 274
The Wise of God alone knows his own Praise,

Nanak : the Wise of the Lord is the Master ofall. [8-8]

Shaloka

He, who keeps the Lord’s Name in his heart,
And Sees the Lord in all,

And salutes the Master for ever and evermore ;
He, Nanak, is the Aparsa’ who Saves all. [2]

Ashtapadi

He whose tongue utters not falsehood,

And, who Loves the Lord and Sees the Pure One in his mind,

Whose eyes are fastened not on the beauty of another's woman,

And, who Serves the Saints and Loves the Holy,

And who hears not slander with his ears,

And deems himself to be the worst (of all creatures),

Who, by the Guru's Grace, dispels his evil, — ; : \
And drives out the desires of his mind, , :

Who disciplines his sex and is free of the five Maladies, .

Nanak : rare is such an Aparsa, the Purest of the pure. [J]

Vaishnava? is he, on whom is the Lord's Grace,
Who is corrupted not by Vishnu’s Maya, :
And does the deed, but cares not for the fruit thereof,
Such a VWaishnava's faith is the pure faith indeed.
He seeks no fruits for the deeds he does,
_ But fills his mind with the Lord's Song.
His body, mind and soul, Meditate on Gopal, the Protector of the earth,
And he is all-mercy to each and all.
He Meditates himself, and makes others Dwell upon the Lord's Name,
Nanak : he alone is the Vaishnava who attains to the highest State of Bliss. [2]
Bhagauti* is he, who is devoted to the Lord’s Worship,
And leaves for ever the company of evil :
Whose Doubt is cast away,
And who Realises.the God in all and Worships Him alone.
In assocjation with the Holy, he washes his Evil off,
Yea, he alone is the Bhagauri: his mind is high,
He Serves his Lord and Master day and night,
And dedicates his body and mind to God,
And his mind clings to the Fect of the Lord :
Such a Bhagawti, Nanak, Attains to his God. [3]

1. mua (TET) : (mt, not ; Uga=RuGA, touch), he who does pot touch another, thinking himself to be puret
than the rest. The Guru here refutes this belief saying it is inward cleanliness that makes one pure.
2. Gas (deat) (or Vaishnava), the disciple of Vishnu, second deity of the Hindu Trinity, who preserves the werld.
He is said to have discharged this function by reincarnating bimselfinto ten Avfaras. Waishnavas ~~~ abstemious in thelr
food habits and believe in the incarnations of Vishnu, :
3. geal (wradt) : Sans. (wry: ), a worshipper of Bhagwon or the Lord Himself.

BAGEGCLCECOCSGOSSSOC OGOCOOBECEGAEGECECEL ECE ISOESSOEPCCOGECLSSSSSCOOCOSOHE:

|
:
8

Page 31
[ 266 ]

He alone is a Pundit who teaches his mind,

And Meditates in his Soul on the Name of God :

And, Drinks the Essence of His Name,

On the teaching of such a one rests the whole world,

Yea, he keeps company with the Gospel of the Lord :

That Pundit is cast not into the womb again.

He understands the essence of the Vedas, Puranas, and the Smrilis,
And finds the Apparent in the Subtle. ;

He instructs all the four castes in the Lord’s Wisdom,

Nanak : such a Pundit I salute forever. [4/

The seed of the Lord’s Name is in every heart’.

Let any of the four castes repeat His Name,

And lo, he, who Utters it, is Saved,

But, in the Society of the Saints alone it is Received.

By His Grace, the Lord brings the Name unto us.

And even the animals, goblins?, and the stony fools Swim across.
The Lord's Name is the panacea for all our ills.

If one Recites the Praise of the Lord, one Receives the Joy of Release.
There is no way other than this to find the Way,

But he alone finds it, in whose Destiny it isso Writ. [5]

He, in whose mind Abides the Lord, P, 275
He alone is named as the True Servant of His Servants.

He Sees the Lord who Pervades all,

And finds Him by being the Slave of His Slaves.

He, who thinks the Lord is near at hand,

That Servant is Approved at the Lord's Court.

He on whom is the Grace of the Lord,

Realises all he within himself.

He lives with ali and yet is not of them,

Nanak : he, who has this Way, is the True Servant of God. [6]
He, who loves from his Soul the Lord's Will

Attains Deliverance while yet alive.

He, who looks alike on pleasure and pain,

Is for ever in Bliss and never in Woe.

As is gold for him, so is dust,

As 15 poison, $0 is nectar,

And as is honour, so dishonour,

As is the king for him, so the beggar,

And he finds his Way in the Working of His Will.

Nanak : such a one attains Deliverance, even in life. /[7/

All places are God's, all peoples,

As they house Him, so do they name Him.

©. He alone does what He does,

And that alone happens what He Wills.

All over is His Expanse, like the sea's with its myriads of waves,
Yea, no one knows the sport of the Lord.

As the Wisdom He Gives, so is the mind [!!umined.

But eternal is the Creator, the Transcendent God.

He is ever, ever, in Mercy ;

Lo, Nanak is Saved by Dwelling on the Lord. [8-9]

Shaloka

Millions Praise Thee, O Lord, but Infinite is Thy Praise :

For, says Nanak, Thou it is who Created the universe of myriad kinds. [J]
Ashtapadi

Millions upon millions are Thy Worshippers, O Lord.

Millions upon millions go the way of works.

1. dtr 43 nae & fees (at ta per et frag): The Gayatri (or the Maha Maatram) is ministered only to the
three higher castes. But the Guru's Word is for all the four castes, including the so-called untouchables.

2. us (ia) is the departed soul or th: spirit before o93¢quial rites have bzen performed to giveit peace. Tt may
also be rendered as ghost.
%, r

Page 31
Millions wpon millions bide at the pilgrim-stations.
Millions upon millions of ascetics wander in the woods.
Millions upan millions listen to the words of the Vedas,
Millions upon millions lead the life of austerity,
Millions upon millions Meditate on their Self.

Millions upon millions of poets recite Thy Praise through poesy.
Millions are giving Thee newest? of names,

But knows not none Thy limits, Q Lord! [J]
Millions upon millions indulge in Ego,

And millions upon millions Abide in l¢norance blind.
Millions upon millions are the hard-hearted misers,
And millions are high and dry without Love.

Millions lay hands on another's trensures,

eS as eas a

And millions indulge in slanderous talk. 2
Millions are gathering nothing but Maya, 7
And wander about millions in alien lands. a

'

They are all doing what Thou Willest, O Lord !

Sayeth Nanak : “Thou alone Knowest the secret of Thy creation’s heart". 2]

Millions are the Siddhas, Yogis and celibates ;

Miilions are the rulers who indulge in pleasures.

Millions are the birds, the poisonous snakes,

And millions upon millions are trees and stones,

Millions are the elements—water, air, fire :

Millions are the countries, earths and spheres. p26

Millions are the suns, moons and stars :

And millions are the gods, demons and Indras shaded by a canopy.
All is Thy Creation, O Lord, Thou who Weavest all in the Thread of Thy Way,
And Thow Savest all and any the Way Thou Willest. /3/
Millions upon millions Abide in activity, inertia, purity? ;
Millions recite the Vedas, the Puranas and Smritis.
Millions are the jewels Thou Createst in the seas ;

And, of myriad Kinds are Thy creatures, O Lord.

And millions are longing for long, long lives.

Millions are the hillocks and mountains of gold,

And millions are the Kinnaras and the Pishdchas* tao,
Millions are the spirits, swines, tigers and eaters of deer*.
Thou art farthest of the far, nearest of the near :

And, yet, Filling all, Thou standest apart. {4]

Millions upon millions are the dwellers of the underworlds,
Millions are the dwellers of heaven. of hell.

Millions are born to die and be born again :

Millions upon millions are going the Round.

Millions upon millions eat their bread in case :

Millions upon millions are tired of toil.

Millions upon millions have hoards to treasure :

Millions are dying for wealth and pleasure.

And, as is His Will, so Keeps He all :

Nanak : all is in the hands of Him alone. [35]

Millions upon millions have renounced the world,

And attached themselves to their Lord alone.

Millions upon millions are the seekers of God ;

And search the Transcendent Lord in their very own Self.

SOVPSSCHOSLHESIOSE

|. Lit, he whose body is ever-new. -

2. “Passion, darkness, peace”, translates Teja Singh, Says Winckrnend, “uhete sie three principles which form
the essence of nature end mein respecively activity, inenia (or darkness), ond iim ncticnme!ciial, fe, purity and
holiness)".
3. ay fang Tuna (oreg, fer, fra): Yekshos (gnomes) are the attendan's of Kubera, the Hindu god of

wealth, Kinveras are gods with head of @ horse and tedy of man. Pistechos cre cherdélas or the low-born.
4. ga, Baa, fdas (qa, gat, gare) : Bhwtas are nature-spirits, goblin-lype ; Aaa, is swine * fag are the eaters

(ma) of deer (figr), fe. lions. :

MP BOIGECEC SOGOOGSSOC GOCOOGOOPOBOEERCOCCLES

|

sy

Page 316 www.sikhbooktlub.com
[ 268 ]

Millions upon millions are athirst for His Sight,

And, them the Eternal Lord Meets forsure.

Millions seek nothing but the Society of the Holy,

And they are Filled with the Love of the Transcendent Lord.
They, on whom is the Grace of the Lord,

Blessed, Blessed, Blessed, are they. [6/7

Millions the species ; millions the divisions of the world :
Millions the skies and the universes,

Millions upon millions have been the prophets of God.

The Lord hath Spread Himself out in a myriad ways.

Time after time was the expanse crealed,

But ever remained our Lord the One, the Absolute, Alone.
Millions has He made in millions of ways,

And, Created by Him, they Merged in Him.

His limits no one can tell,

For, He alone is and He alone Knows. /{7)

Millions upon millions are the Servants of the Transcendent God,
Whose Souls are [llumined (with Divine Light).

Millions are those who know the Quintessence :

And they ever See no one but the One alone.

Millions upon millions Drink the Nectar of the Lord's Name.
And become immortal, living eternally they.

Millions upon millions Praise (nothing but) the Lord's Name,
And they get the life of the Soul and bide in the Great Peace,
He, the Lord, Remembers His Servants for eVer and ever.
And such, O Nanak, are the Beloved of God. /8-/0]

Shaloka

He, the Lord, is the only Doer ; there is on one other than He.
Says Nanak : “I am a Sacrifice unto Him who Pervades water, earth and the interspace”. [J]

Ashtapadi

He is the Doer, the Willer and the Cause :
And, that alone happens what He Wills.
In a moment, He Creates and then Destroys,
And, no one can find the limits of the Lord.
He Creates by His Will and Keeps (life) even without (visible) support. P. 277
And, what is Created by His Will, Merges again in His Will,
His Will it is that Makes men do high and low deeds,
And His Will again that Works in a myriad ways.
His Will it is that Creates and oversees His Glory.
Nanak : our Lord, the God Pervades all. J
If the Lord so Wills, man attains Salvation.
If the Lord so Wills, even the Stones will Swim.
If the Lord so Wills, He Keeps the body without breath.
If the Lord so Wills, man Recites the Glory of the Lord.
If the Lord so Wills, He Saves the Fallen ones :
He our Lord Does whatever is in His Thought.
The Lord is the Master of here and Hereafter.
He Sports and Enjoys, yea, He, the Know-all.
We do what is His Will.
So T seek no one other than Him. [2]
Say ye, what can a mere man do ?
Tis the Lord who Does what He Wills.
If it lay ina man’s hands, he would grab all,
But he can do only what the Lord Commands.
Knowing not, man abides with evil,
For, if he knew, would he not Save himself ?
Beguiled by Doubt, he wanders in all directions,
And, in a moment, (his mind) cruises through the four continents.
They, on whom is His Grace, them the Lord Blesses with His Worship.
And, such beings, Nanak, Merge in the Lord’s Name. /3/
‘ | - * =

ee Guru-Granth Baltib

Page 317 
In a moment, a poor worm He can place on the throne.

Yea, He, the Transcendent Lord, the Protector of the poor,

He, of whose merit no one is aware,

Io a moment the Lord can make him known all over.

From him, on whom is the Lord’s Grace,

No account is asked by the Master of the universe.

Our life and body are His and His alone : re
(For), He, the Perfect Lord, [llumines all hearts.

The Lord has Created all by Himself,

And Nanak lives to be a witness unto His Glory. [4]

Tt lies not in the hands of man to altain power,

For, He, the Master of all, is the Doer and the Cause.

This poor wretch of a man is in Thy Command, O Lord,

And for him whatever Thou Willest will come to pass.

Man abides now in the high state, now in the low state (of mind),

Is pleased by pleasure and grieved by pain ;

Or makes slander and worry his way,

Flies now to the skies, sinks low into the underworld,

And then becomes he a man of knowledge, and Meditates on the Lord.
Nanak : it is He; the Lord alone, who Unites man with Himself. fs}

_Lo, now one dances in a.myriad ways,

And now he sleeps through night and day.
And now he is filled with wild rage,

And now becomes he humble like the dust, |
Now he becomes the king of kings,

And, now he wears the coat of a beggar.
Here he is slandered,

There, he gets praised,
(But), one goes as is the Will of the Lord :
Nanak utters the Truth, by the Guru's Grace. [6]

all
“)
e)
€)
6
e)
é)
é
alt
2
8)
e)
&)
@)
‘J
#)
J
fy
fe)
e)
EJ
é
3
3
3
]
5

Now a man discourses like a Pundit,

And, now he observes silence and mieditates,

He bathes now at the pilgrm stations,

And now becomes he an ascetic, a seeker, a dispenser of knowledge?.

Now, he becomes a worm, an ¢lephant, even a moth,

And wanders he thus through myriads of species. P. 278

Like a juggler, he juggles through many a part :

But, so does a man dance, as is the Will of the Lord.

For, that alone happens what the Lord Wills.

Nanak : there is no one other than Lord, the God. [7 /

When man finds the Society of the Holy,

And turns not his back upon it,

His mind is Illumined,

And this state goes not.

And his body and mind are Imbued with Love alone,

And he lives for ever with the Transcendent Lord.

As water mingles with water,

So does his Light Merge in the All-light.

Ended for ever is his coming-and-going,

Oh, Nanak is a Sacrifice unto such a Lord, [8-JI]

i]
4)

Shaloka

The poor abide in Peace, for, they have shed their Ego :

Nanak : the high and the =e have been wasted away by their-pride. J]
Ashtapadi

He, in whose heart is the pride of dominions,
Dies like a cur and falls into hell.

He, in whose heart is. the pride of beauty,

Is but a worm abiding in dirt.

1. af Faraees (qf Ferarret) = Hr. inawledge tame) of the (or which is in the) mouth,
Gurr-Granth Sahib 99999999099999999999999999999999999990229999900904

Page 318 Ta
Page 319

He, in whose heart is the pride of good deeds,

He, forsure, dies to go the Round again and again.
He, in whose heart is the pride of wealth and lands,

Is a blind fool, void of Wisdom,

He, who is blessed with humility by the Lord's Grace ;
Obtains Deliverance here, and Peace Hereafter. [J]

If a wealthy man has pride of his riches.

(Knows he not that) nothing goes along with him. not even a straw ?
If he has the pride of having hosts of men,

(Knows he not that) they are destroyed in an instant ?

He, who deems himself to be all-powerful,

(Knows he not that) he becomes but dust ina moment 7

The proud one takes no one into account,

But him the lord of Law humbles and destroys.

He, who loses his Ego, by the Guru's Grace,

He, Nanak, is Approved at the Lord's Court, /2/

If a man, in pride, does myriads of good deeds,

All his toil is wasted away.

If he does penance in pride,

He wanders between heaven and hell, and goes the Round again and again.
He, who is in ceaseless effort, but has not a tender heart,

Oh, how shall he reach the Court of the Lord ?

He, who seeks to be called good,

Him goodness touches nat.

Nanak : he, whose mind is the Dust of all,

His repute alone is the Purest of the Pure. [3]

So long as man thinks he can do a thing,

He attains not Peace.

So long as he deems he does a thing,

He is cast into the womb again and over again.

So long as he thinks one is his friend, another foc,

His mind stays not in Peace.

So long as he is attached to Maya,

He receives punishment from the Lord of Law.

He, whose Shackles are Cut off, by God's Grace,

He alone, Nanak, sheds his Ego : on him is the Guru's Grace, [4]
Earning a thousand, one runs after a hundred tho.sand,

And is satiated not, howsoever much he gathers.

He indulges in the pleasures of life,

But is satiated not, and wears out his life to death.

Without Contentment, no one is content,

And, like the objects of a dream, all one’s works avail not.

He, who is in Love with the Lord's Name gathers all Peace,

But, it is by great, good Fortune that one Receives (the Lord’s Name).
He, the Lord alone, is the Doer and the Cause ;

And so Nanak Dwells on Him, ever and for evermore. [5]

He, the Doer, Does all of Himself ; He alone is the Cause,
It is.not in the hands of man to find the Way.

As is His Pleasure, so becomes man,

(For), He the One, is the only One.

Whatever He has done, He Does in His Pleasure,
Yea, He who is the farthest and the nearest of all,
He, who Sees, Knows and discriminates :

Yea, He who is the One and also the many.

He dies not, nor perishes ; He comes not, nor goes.
Nanak : He Pervades all, ai! 2“@r. at all times. [6]
He alone Instructs, He alone Understands ;

He alone Pervades all-in-all.

He Spreads Himse)f out in a vast Expanse

For, He is the Creator : all belong to Him.
Nothing can happen but what He Wills,

Sa! wl wel ech ee a St

P. 279

229098 Guru-Granth Salih
He alone is in everything, and in every place,

And His doings He alone does.

He Plays and Enjoys in many roles,

For, all minds are in Him, and He is in the minds of all.

Nanak : how can one put valuc on such a priceless Lord ? [7]
Eternal, Immortal, for ever True, is the Lord,

But, one tells of Him only by the Guru's Grace.

Whatever He creates is True, and nothing but True ;

But, of myriads of creatures rare is the one who knows Him,

How Pure, how Good, is Thy Form, O Lord,

O, the most Beauteous, the Limitless One, O Thou beyond Praise !
How Pure, Immaculate, ts Thy Word, O Dear,

In all hearts it Dwells ; it all ¢ars Hear, all tongues Recite.

And, he becomes the Purest of the Pure,

Who, Ninak, Meditates on Thy Name, with Love inthe mind. /4-J2/

Shaloka

He, who secks the Refuge of the Saints, is Saved.
And he, who slanders the Saints, is ever on the Round. [J]

Ashtapadi

f)
-)
@)
é)
i]
s)
*%)
Slandering the Saints snaps the span of one’s life.

Slandering the Saints, one gets not Release from the Yarra.

Slandering the Saints, one loses Peace, P)
Slandering the Saints, one is thrown into hell,

Slandering the Saints, one’s mind becomes Impure,

Slandering the Saints, one is devoid of Honour.

He who is cursed by the Saint is Saved by no one, . £)
O, cursed be the place where a Saint is slandered. 8
If the Saint, in his Grace, bestows Mercy,

Then, in the Society of the Saints, even the slanderer is Saved, [1

The slanderer of the Saints is a wry-faced wretch.

The slanderer of the Saints cries like a crow.

The slanderer of the Saint gets a serpent’s birth,

Slandering the Saints, one becomes a quadruped, a crawling worm.

Slandering the Saint, one is burnt by desire,

Slandering the Saint, one beguiles all.

Slandering the Saints, one’s power wanes,

And, one becomes lowest of the low.

There is no Refuge for the slanderer of the Saint. P. 280

But if the Saint so wishes, the slanderer too is Redeemed, [2]

The slanderer of a Saint over-reaches himself *.

The mind of a slanderer stays not for a while.

The slanderer of a Saint is a brute killer :

The slanderer of a Saint is cursed by God.

The slanderer of a Saint is devoid of Power.

The slanderer of a Saint is a wretch writhing in Woe.

The slanderer of a Saint is afflicted by Disease.

The slanderer of a Saint is eternally Separated from the Lord,

The slander of the Saint is the vilest of sins,

But if the Saint so wills, Nanak, even his slanderer is Saved. [3]

The slanderer of a Saint is ever [mpure.

‘The slanderer of a Saint is the friend of no one.

The slanderer of a Saint is punished with Pain.

The slanderer of a Saint is forsaken by all. , 9
The slanderer of a Saint is filled with Ego. @
The slanderer of a Saint lives in Evil, 2

I. faaz (Fang) : Sans, (fra) an animal going horizontally, as distinguished from mao who walks erect; a

lower or irrational animal,
2, maar? (ee §) ong rel : fi. he who burns others with his muchness, or excess.
2
Gurn-Granth; Sahib 99992929999999999999999999999999999999999 99990990"

Page 32
The slanderer of a Saint is born (only) to die.

The slanderer of a Saint is devoid of Peace.

The slanderer of a Saint has no Refuge to seek:

(But) if the Saint so wills, he too is United with the Lord, [4]
The slanderer of a Saint falls in mid-career :

The salanderer of a Saint completes no task.

The slanderer of a Saint wanders in Wilderness,

The slanderer of a Saint loses his Way,

The slanderer of a Saint is empty from within,

As is the corpse without life.

The slanderer of a Saint has no roots,

And, he reaps what he sows.

No one can Save the traducer of a Saint :

But if the Samt so wills, he can Save him too. [5]
The slanderer of a Saint wails,

Asa fish, out of water, writhes in pain.

The slanderer of a Saint is for ever Hungry,

As the fire is satiated not with any amount of wood.
‘The slanderer of a Saint dies alone,

As the spurious sesame-stalk is abandoned in the field.
The slanderer of a Saint is devoid of Faith ;

The slanderer of a Saint speaks nothing but falsehood,
(But), the slanderer does what bis long past has decreed.
For such, Nanak, is the Will of God. [6]

Deformed is the slanderer of a Saint :

And he gets Punished at the Lord's Court,

The slanderer of a Saint is for ever Hungry.

The slanderer of a Saint is neither alive nor dead.

No wish of the Saint's traducer is fulfilled ;

The slanderer of a Saint leaves the world without hope.
The slanderer of a Saint finds not the Abode of Peace.
But, as is the Lord's Will, so becomes one’,

The Writ of past deeds is erased not,

And of this mystery, God alone Knows, 7]

He is in the heart of all, He the Great Doer :

I Salute Him ever and for evermore,

Call then on the Lord, night and day,

And Meditate on Him with each morsel, each breath.
For, nothing happens that He Wills not,

And as He Makes one, so one becomes,

It is all His Play, He is the Doer ;

Who else can say, or think it out ? P, 281
He, on whom is His Grace, Him He Blesses with His Name,
And he, Nanak, is the Blessed of the Lord. /#-J3/

Shaloka

Give up thy cleverness, O good man, and Dwell upon the Lord’s Name.
Nanak : have trust only in God, that thy Pain and Doubt depart. [JJ

Ashtapadi

Vain, O vain is the support of man,

For the Giver only is He the Lord alone,

By whose Giving one is satiated, ;

And thereafter one Hungers no more.

He alone Saves, He alone Destroys, ;
And nothing, nothing, lies in the hands of man.
Know.then His Will to attain Peace,

And wear His Name.as thy neckiae.

Meditate on Him and Him alone,

That thou may be taken out o of the ham’ $ way. [1]

OL. ‘aq 38 Sat ae} ‘af’ fe” (ter wig er ety & ere) is rendered by Teja ‘Singh as: “As eo wishes, so becomes he".
But this is against the Guru's cencept as detailed in the following lines,

3932290 Guru-Granth Subib
Praise the Absolute Lord in thy mind. '

O my mind, do this Decd : this is thy True avecation,

Thy tongue will become Pure Drinking the Nectar (of the Lord's Name)

And thy Soul thereafter will rest in Peace.

See thou the Play of the Lord with thy eyes

And forsake all society but that of the Saints.

With thy feet tread the Way to thy God:

And thy Sins will be washed off, if thou Dwell on the Lord even for a moment.
With thy hands do the God's Deeds, with thy ears hear the Gospel of the Lord,
And thy face will look Beauteous at the Lord’s Court. [2]

They are the fortunate ones in the world,

Who, for ever, Sing the Praises of the Lord.

He, who Dwells on the Lord's, Name,

Is the master of Riches and Power in the world.

Let thy body and thy mind and thy tongue Sing the Praise of the Lord,

That thou enter the Realm of Bliss.

Know thou only the One and One alone, '
For, He alone Knows the secret of here and Hereafter. . }
They, whose mind accepts the company of the Lord's Name,

They have known the Lord, the Immaculate God. /3/

If, by God*s Grace, one knows oneself, o)
One rids oneself of desire. . L]
And one says the Praises of the Lord, in the Society of the Saints 3
And the world’s ailments afflict one not. '
Sing thou the Lord’s Praise day and night, !

That thou attain Deliverance, even in thy household. :

He, whose Mainstay is the One and One alone,

The Noose of the Yam is for him no more.

He, in whose mind is the Hunger of the Lord,
Wanak : he the one is never in Pain. [4]

He who Remembers the Lord in mind and soul,

He, the Saint, is in the Holy Peace, and wavers not. .
He, on whom is the Lord’s Grace, :
He, the True Servant, is afraid of no one. . . a
And he witnesses his Lord in His whole Splendour,

Yea, He, who Pervades all He Creates.

Searching and searching, one finds the End,

And, by God's Grace, knows the Essence! of the Real.

And then one Sees that He is the Cause of all, '
And He who's the Apparent is also the Subtle*, /5/ i

Nothing dies, nothing is born :

For, Thou alone Playest Thy Play (cither way), O God !

Coming and going, the seen and the unseen,

Are all in Thy Command and Will, O Lord !

Thou alone art all-in-all ; P. 282
Thou alone Createst and Destroyest in a myriad ways.

Thou art the Eternal Lord, nothing of Thee is lost,

And Thou Keepest the whole universe in Thy Will.

Unknowable, Unfathomable, the Wielder of Power,

Thee, Nanak Worshippeth if Thou Willest. {6]

He, who knows the Lord, is worthy of praise :

He Saves the whole world by his Instruction.

The Servant of the Lord Saves all :

Yea, the Servant of the Lord rids us of our Pain,
Him the Merciful Lord Himself Unites with Himself,
And he is Blest, Dwelling on the Guru's Word.

l. 3g (aa) : (Sans. gzaqqz), the real nature of the human soul or the material world as being identical with the

, Supreme Spirit pervading the universe.
2, gy (gag) : (Sans. qe) subtle (spirit) : RIG (waqg) : (Sams. eqer) gross.

GurueBranth Oakib Oe
Page 322
p
e)
()
&
&
a
5
3
@
io]
o
a
&)
3
a}

Page 323

(But), such a one one Serves,

Only if upon one is the Mercy of God,

He finds Peace, Meditating on the Lord's Name. ;

Nanak : know thou that such a one is the Highest of the high. {7
Whatever (a God's Devotee) does, he does in the Love of God:
And the Lord for ever Abides with him. _

All that he does comes spontaneousiy ty him, ‘
For, he has Realised the Creator Lord. :

The Lord's doings he deems sweet,

And the Lord seems to him as He is,

He Merges in Him from whom he issued forth, ;
For, he is (now) the Treasure of Peace and the Honour suiteth him.
In Honouring His Devotees, God Honours Himself :

For, Nanak, God and His Devotees are for ever one, [4-/4]

Shaloka
God, replete with all powers Knows the State of thy heart.

Nanak is a Sacrifice unto Him throughwhose Meditation one is Saved, [7]

Ashtapadi ° *

The Lord mends the cut (of thy life),

Yea, He the Sustainer of all.

He, in whose heart is the care of all,

Of Him, no one is devoid, O none.

Q my mind, Meditate for ever on thy Lord,

For, He, thy Eternal God, is all-in-all.

Howsoever may we will and try,

Of ourselves but nothing happens.

Without Him, nothing is of avail to thee :

Remember thou then Him who brings thee Deliverance.. [1]
If one is Beauteous, let him not love himself,

For, it is the Light of God that manifests itself in beauty.
Why pride on thy riches, O man,

When all the riches are but His Gift to thee.

If one deems oneself the mightiest of the mighty,
Without the Power of the Lord, of what avail is his might ?
If some one sets himself up as a man of charity,

Him the Great Giver takes to be an ignorant fool.

He, who loses his Ego, by the Grace of God,

‘Nanak : he the one ails not. /2/

As the pillar doth a temple support,

So doth the Guru’s Word support the mind,

As the stone swims across a stream ina boat,

So is the man Saved by taking to the Guru’s Feet.
As the lamp lights up utter darkness,

50 is the mind [llumined by the Guru's Presence.
AS one picks up one’s way in a deep wood,

So is one’s Light burnished, meeting with the Saints.
Of the Feet of such Saints, I seek the Dust,

Fulfil, this Prayer of Nanak, O Lord. [3]

O my foolish mind, why wail,

For, we get only what is Writ in our Destiny.

He the Lord is the Dispenser of Pleasure and Pain,
So, forsake all else, and Call on Him alone.

Be pleased with what He Does,

And lose not thyself, O ignorant fool !

Say, which are the things that came with thee ?
Why then be attached to them, like a crazy moth ?
Remember the Name of the Lord in thy heart,

And then, Nanak, Attain unto Him with Honour. [4]

Pld od oid aed ay

20 Guru-Granth Sali
The Thing that one cume here to attain,

Is in tne nouse of the Saints, the Lord's Name.

Barter away thy Ego, and get thy mind back in return ;
And weigh up only the Lord’s Name in the Balance of thy heart.
Loaded with this Merchandise, po thy way with the Saints,
And shed all else which is false and embroils thee in Vain.
And, every one will then Bless thee,

And thy Face will be Bright in thy God's Domain.

This is the Trade but of the few,

Nanak is a Sacrifice unto those who act thus. [5]

Wash the Feet of the Saints and Drink the Wash,

And Dedicate thy life to no one but the Saint.

In the Dust of his Feet, Bathe thy body,

And be a Sacrifice unto him,

Whose Service one finds by great, good Fortune

And one Sings the Praises of the Lord.

The Saint keeps us out of the harm's way ;

If one Sings the Lord's Praise, one Tastes Nectar.

Says Nanak : “I have sought the Refuge of the Saints",
“And thus have found the highest state of Bliss", [6]
Our Lord, the God, brings even the dead to life,

And brings He food to the hungry.

His Sight bestows the Treasures (Of Peace) :

But one finds Him only if it is Writ in one’s Destiny.
Every thing belongs to Him ; He is the Doer of everything.
Nothing is without Him, nor will there ever be.

Call on Him, O man, for ever, day and night :

For, this is the Purest of the Pure deeds,

Him, on whom is His Grace, He Blesses with His Name,
And He, Nanak, becomes the Purest of the Pure. [7]
He, who ‘has faith in the Guru,

Into Him Comes Lord, the God,

He is renowned as a Bhakfa in the three worlds,

Yea, he, in whose heart Abides the One Lord,

True is his doing, True is his way,

Truth is in his mind, Truth he speaks.

True is his Vision, True is his form :

He spreads the Truth, goes he the True Way.

He, who has looked upon the Lord as Truth,

He the one will Merge in Truth, /8-J5]

Shaloka

Neither He has form nor colour : from the three Modes He stands apart :
And he alone, Nanak, knows Him on whom is His Pleasure. [J]

Ashtapadi

Keep the never-dying Lord in thy mind

And shed the love of man.

For, beyond Him is nothing,

And He, the Lord, Pervades all.

He is the Seer, He the All-wise,

Unfathomable, Deep and All-knowing.

He is the Transcendent Lord, the God of gods, Supporter of the earth, P, 284
The Treasure of Mercy, Compassionate and Forgiving.

In the mind of Nanak is this Desire, O Lord, -
That he takes to the Feet of Thy Saint. [J] ;
The Lord grants our wishes and is worthy of being our Refuge,

And that alone happens what He cauées to be done.

He fills and He empties in the twinkling of the eye,

(But), His Mystery mo one can unravel.

“Ever-joy’ is His Form, and He lives in the fullness of Bliss : ‘

Hear ye, He is the Master of all things.

Page 32
Page 325

[ 276 ]

He is the King among kings, Yogi among Yogis,

An Apcetic among ascetics ; Indulgent as a householder,
Meditating on Him, the Devotees have found Peace,

But of That Person, Nanak, no one has ever found the limits. [2]

Of the Lord's Play, there is no telling :

Even the gods are tired of their search,

How may the son witness the birth of his father ?

He it is who has Strung the Creation on His Thread.
He, whom He grants Good sense, Wisdom and Intuition,
He, His Servant, Dwells on His Name.

He. whom He Beguiles by the Three Modes,

‘He dies to be born again to die.

Q, all the high and low stations are His,

And Nanak knows Him as He Wills him to know. [3]

Myriads are His forms, myriads His colours.

Myriads His Wears, but He remains One.

Evolves He in a myriad ways,

He, the Lord, the Eternal, the One, the Absolute,

In a moment, He Plays in a myriad ways,

And Fills all places, yea, He the All-perfect Lord.

In a myriad ways, He Created the Creation :

But His Value is known only to Himself alone.

All hearts are His, and all places,

So, Nanak lives by Meditating on His Gracious Name. [4]

Thy Name is the Support! of all Thy beings, O Lord !

Thy Name is the Support of the worlds, the universes.

Thy Name is the urge of the Smritis, the Vedas and Puranas,
Thy Name informs all Wisdom and Intuition,

Thy Name is the Support of the skies and the underworlds,
Thy Name is the Support of all forms of life.

Thy Name is the Support of all continents and spheres.
Hearing Thy Name, all are Saved.

He, on whom is Thy Grace, is Dedicated to Thy Name :
And, he gets Release in the State of Bliss. /3]

True is His Form, True is His Seat,

Wherein He, the True One, alone Abides.

His Deeds are True, True is His Word,

Yea, He, the True Person, Pervades all.

True are His Works, True is His Creation.

True is His Seed, True is His Fruit.

Purest of the Pure are the doings of the Lord,

He, who knows it; sees good in all.

The True Name of the Lord brings Peace and Joy.

Nanak got his True Faith, through the Guru's Grace. [6]

The Saints Instruct us in the True Word.

True are they in whose heart Dwells the Lord.

If one were to know and love? the Truth,

He'd Meditate on the Lord's Name and attain Deliverance.
He, the Lord, is True, True is His Creation.

And, He alone Knows His Limits, His State.

He, to whom the world belongs, He the Creator of all,

Of Him no one knows, think howsoever one may.

Of the Creator how can the created one know the limits ?
Nanak : that alone happens what He Wills. [7]

I am lost in wonder, seeing Thy wondrous Wonder.
He, who knows it all, Tastes the Taste of Joy.

I.

It could also be rendered as “The Name informs all ereatures, all beings”.

2. fsafs (Prefer) : (Sans. frefir :), devotion.

P. 285
All Thy Servants are filled with Thy Love :

And, through the Guru’s Instruction, Receive the (four) objects of life.
And they, in their Mercy, kill the Pain of others,

Along with them the world too Swims across.

He, who Serves the Servants of the Lord, is the man of Destiny,

For, he gets attached to the One in their holy company.

He, who Sings the Praises of Govind,

Gathers the Fruit, Nanak, by the Guru’s Grace. [8-16]

Shaloka

True in the Beginning, True in the Primeval age,
True He is, and True He shall be. [7]

Ashtapadi

Blessed are the Lord’s Feet, Blessed those that Touch! them ;
Blessed is His Worship : Blessed the Worshippers.

Blessed is His Sight ; Blessed the Seer ;

Blessed is His Name ; Blessed those that Meditate (on it).
True is He, True is His Creation,

He is the Virtue, He the Dispenser of Virtue, Q
True is the Lord’s Word, True its utterer. 3
He, who knows (the Lord), to him all is True.

Nanak : He alone is True, yea, He alone. [JJ ' 3
He, who Believes in God as Truth in his heart, -
Knows the Essence of the Creator, the Cause of causes.

He, who Receives Faith of the Lord in himself,

His mind is Illumined by the Reality of the Real.

Shedding fear, lives he in the Fearless One,

And Merges in Him from whom he issued forth. S
The thing that’s Merged in its own kind, 2)
Now, who can tell, it is a thing apart ? 4
Rare is the one who knows this knowledge, .

That by Attuning to the Lord, one becomes one with Him. [2] .

The Servant of the Lord is for ever at His Command.

The Servant of the Lord is for ever in His Worship.

The Servant of the Lord has Faith in the mind.

The Servant of the Lord is Pure in deed,

The Servant of the Lord Sees the Lord ever at his side.

The Servant of the Lord abides ever in His Love.

His Servant the Lord Sustains as His Own :

For, the Lord Keeps the Honour of His Servant.

He alone is the Servant on whom is His Grace.

And that Servant, Nanak, calls for ever on Him. [3]

God Defends the Honour of His Servant :

Forsure does He offer him His Refuge.

He Grants Glory to His Servant

And Makes him’ Meditate on His Name.

He Saves the Honour of the Servant Himself,

And then of his State and Glory no one can tell.

No one equals the Servant of the Lord,

For, he the one is the highest of the high.

He, whom the Lord Blesses with His Service,

Nanak, that Servant is acclaimed all over. /4/

If the Lord Grants power to a mete ant,

She can destroy myrids of hosts.

He, whose life He does not like to end, ;

Him He Protects with His Gracious Hands. P. 286
The man tries in many, many ways,

F)
t)
e)
6)
: &
Y)
ey
ey
?]
sal

1. Teja Singh renders it thus : “Truth is His touch, true the one who seeks its thrill". The ‘Feet of the Lord"
should not be taken literally. It ooly means ons's total surrender to God.

GureGrunth Sajib 0909022229099999999999999999999999092229999999994
Page 32

€)
—
Ef
“
©)
f
{)
a)
e)
5
e)
f
3
2
’)
pl

GJ
But his doings avail him not. é
z
No one can keep nor kill, but He,

For He, the Lord, is the Protector of all.

Why then, O men, ye worry in vain,

Call ye on Him, the Mysterious Wonder. [5]
Call on Him again and again,

And Drink the Nectar that satiates ye.

Those turned God-wards, who found the Jewel of the Lord’s Name,

Knew not another, nor saw another.

The Lord's Name informs the beauty of forms, the Lord's Name is the (true) riches :

The Lord's Name is the holy company ; (for) it bring us peace.
They, who were satiated by the Love of the Name,
They Merged in the Name, body and soul.

Uprising, downsitting and in sleep, they Cal] on the Name of the Lord.

For this, Nanak, is the eternal Task of a Devotee of God. [6]
Recite His Praises with thy tongue, day and night :

This is the Gift that He has Bestowed upon his Servants.
The Devotee Meditates in the joy of his Soul,

And so he Merges his self in his Lord,

He knows the Will of His God,

And Believes that whatever comes, Comes from Him.
Q, how shall I Praise Him

Whose Merits J] can never tell ?

He, who lives day and night in the Presence of the Lord,
He, the True Servant, is the Perfect One, [7/

O my mind, seek his Refuge,

And, offer thy body and mind to him

Who has Realised his Lord,

He indeed is the giver of all gifts :

And, all get Peace in bis sanctuary.

For, his Sight washes off all our Sins.

Shed then all thy cleverness,

And devote thyself to the Service of the Lord's Servant.
Thy comings-and-goings shall cease,

When Worship thou the Feet of such aone. /6-J7/

Shaloka

He, who Realised the True Lord, is called the True Guru :
In his company is the disciple Saved and he Calls on the Lord.

Ashtapadi

The True Guru sustains the Devotee! :

(For), the Guru is for ever merciful to his Servant.

The scum of his Evil mind the Guru washes off,

And he Sings the Lord's Name through the Guru’s Word.
The Guru Cuts off the Fetters of his Devotee,

(And) so the Devotee turns his back upon Evil*.

The Guru gives the Gift of the Lord's Name to the disciple :
And so becomes he the Fortunate one:

The Guru Saves him both here and Hereafter.

Nanak : the Guru protects the disciple in his love. [I]
The disciple, who lives in the Guru's Home,

Should submit to His Will and command forsure,

And pride not on what he does,

And Meditate ever in the heart on the Lord's Name,

He should Selj-out his mind to the Guru,

Then, such a Servant has all his desires fulfilled.

1. Let. disciple.

[1]

2. Thisis often construed by many translators #8 meaning : “the Guru cuts the fetters off, if the devotee sheds
_ his evil. But the loosening of the bonds itself cntails the disavowal of evil. Again, according to the Sikh doctrine,
release from bondage.is not dependent wholly upon one's being virtuous, In the fina) analysis, it 1s the spiritual Grace of
the Great Enlightencr—God—that illumines the mind and so one turms one’s back on evil, though the Grace of Ged 100 is

inherent in the being of things, if they follow the Will,
3. ie., Guru's Presence.

22232290 @Guru-Granth Sahi
He, who Serves without desire for reward,

He alone Attains to the Lord, .

(But), He, on whom is the Grace of God, f P, 287
He alone seeks the counsel of the Guru. [2]

The Servant, who wholly! pleases his Guru,

Alone knows the Way of the Lord.

The True Guru is he who has the Lord's Name in his heart :
O, [am a Sacrifice unfo the Guru a myriad times.

For, He is the treasure of everything and blesser of the Soul,
And is Imbued, night and day, with the Love of the Lord.
In the.Lord abides His Servant, the Lord Abides in him,
For, the two are one ; and neither is Separate from the other.
By a thousand clevernesses, one finds not the Lord,

But if one’s Lot is Awake, one attains unto Him. [{3/

(The Guru) has a Holy Presence seeing which one becomes Pure,
Touching His Feet, one’s life becomes holy.

If one meets with him one Recites the Praise of the Lord,

And reaches His True Court.

Hearing His Word, one’s ears are satiated,

The mind is at Peace and the Soul is sated. ;

Such is the True Guru, whose Instruction is eternally True’,

In His ambrosial Sight, one becomes a Saint,

His Virtues are limitless ; Him who can evaluate ?

Nanak : he, on whom is His pleasure, him He Unites with the Lord. [4]

The tongue is one, but endless is His Praise.

He is the True Person, the Perfect One, of great Discrimination.

Through no speech can one reach the Lord, .
For, He is Unfathomable, Incomprehensible, ever in the State of Eternal Bliss?.
He needs no sustenance, is without enmity and is All-peace,

And His value but no one could tell.

Myriads of Devotees pay obeisance to Him,

And Dwell in their heart on His Lotus-Feet.

Sacrifice am J unto the True Guru,

By whose Grace I Dwell upon such a Lord, | {3/

Rare is the one who Realises the Essence of the Lord.

He Tastes Nectar and becoines immortal he,

He, to whose heart is Revealed the Treasure of Good,

Of him there is no Death ; he lives eternally.

He Calls on his Lord, the God, night and day,

And gives True Instruction to the Devotees of the Lord.

He is attached neither to Maya, nor [nfatuation,

And keeps the One Lord eternally in his mind.

And, the utter Darkness of his mind 1s Illumined,

And, he casts away his Doubt and Attachment and Pain. [6]

The agitated mind finds Peace,

And one lives in Joy and one’s Sorrow departs.

Goes one’s fear of life and death,

Through the perfect teaching of the Saint.

One sheds fear and lives in the Fearless Lord,

And all one's mind's Ailings are cast off.

He, to whom one belongs Bestows His Grace .
And one Meditates on the Name of the Lord, in association with the Holy.

He attains Peace and rid is his mind of wandering in Doubt.

Hear then, Nanak, with thy ears, the Praises of the Lord. [7]

He is the Absolute, He the Related One,
Who, by His Power, has bewitched all.
1. ain favre (after fara) : dit, ewenty Biswas (there are twenty Biswas in a Bigha, a land-measure), /.e. perfectly,
2. me (agg) lit, that which cannot (nf) be destroyed (38).

3.) Lit, in the state of Nirwar, Z

. ” #)

Gure-Granth Sahih 9999229290992999999999399999999999098229999900904
Page 32

roc cruciurcccrcererseucuccutrucrccccurcrrocee croeficrentrciekrerccclercrccrccneccrmuccccrccrrcrtercercrcrcrcrr
His Play the God Plays of Himself,

And Himself alone Knows His True Worth.

There is no one other than He,

Who Pervades all, yea, He the One.

In all forms, in all colours, is He, like warp and woof,
(But), He is Revealed to us in the Society of the Saints.

He informs all his Creation with His Power Supreme. P, 288
Says Nanak : “I am a Sacrifice unto Him a myriad times”, [8-/8]
Shaloka

Without the Lord's Name, nothing goes along with thee ; Maya is but like ashes.
Practise the Name of the Lord, O Nanak, for, this is thy only True Treasure. [J]

Ashtapadi

Reflect upon God in the Society of the Saints :

And have the Support of, and Dwell upon, only the Lord’s Name,
Friend, forsake all other efforts :

And Dwell on the Lotus-Feet in thy heart.

He is the Creator, the Cause, the All-powerful He :

So hold fast to His Name, the Thing of things.

Gather this Treasure to be considered fortunate,

How Pure, how Pure, is the Instruction of the Saints,

(Through which) one rests one’s Hope on the One alone.

And then, Nanak, all one’s Afflictions are dispelled, {J/

The wealth, which one seeks in all the four quarters (of the earth),
That wealth one finds in the Service of the Lord.

The happiness that one desires, day upon day,

That happiness one gathers in the Society of the Saints. ‘
The Glory that one seeks to gain by good deeds,

That, forsooth, is in seeking the asylum of the Lord.

An-affliction for which one finds no cure,

Goes off with the Panacea of the Lord's Name,

Of all the Treasures, the Lord's Name is the greatest :

Meditate then on it, to be accepted at the Lord’s Court. /2/]

If one instructs one's mind in the Lord’s Name,

The mind straying in ten directions comes back home.

Nothing, nothing can him afflict,

In whose heart Dwells the Lord.

The Dark age burns us all like fire, the Lord's Name is a soothing balm. ‘
He who Meditates on it attains eternal Bliss.

His fear departs ; his Desire is fulfilled ;

And in the Love of Devotion, his Soul is Illumined.

And Abides he in the Abode of the Immortal,

Aud, Nanak, the Yama'’s Noose is for him no more. [3]

He, who speaks of the Essence, is the True Servant,

But, he, who comes and goes, leads a false life.

No more his comings and goings, who takes to the Service of the Lord ;

And, losing himself, seeks Refuge of the God of gods.

Thus is the Jewel of one’s Life Saved :

And, one Meditates on the Name, the Support of all life.

All our many efforts are in vain ; they Save us not,

Nor all our reading of the Smritis, the Shastras and the Vedas.

’ He who with all his heart meditates on the Lord’s Name,

All the Desires of his mind are fulfilled. {4
Thy wealth goes not along with thee :

Why then assemble it, O foolish mind ?

Thy sons, friends, family and wife,

Say, who of these keeps faith with thee like the Master ?
The power of dominions, the expanse of Maya,

Which of these can lead thee to thy Deliverance ?

The joy-ride of the horses, the elephants and chariots,

Is all a vain show, yea, a Vain expanse,
He who Gave them, Him the estranged one knows not :
And, forgetting the Lord's Name, he grieves (in the end). [5] -é
© Ignorant one, submit thyself to the Instruction of the Guru, :
For, many that were clever, were drowned, Meditating not on the Lord's Name.

Dwell on thy Lord in thy mind, O friend,

That thy mind becomes Pure and whole.

Keep the Lotus-Feet of the Lord in thy. mind,
That the vices one gathers, birth after birth, depart from thee. P. 289

+ Call on thé Lord’s Name and inspire others to do the same,
For, by hearing, uttering and living it, one attains Release.
The Lord's Name is the Essence of all things, it is the only Truth,
Utter then the Praises of thy Lord, the God, the natural way, [6]
Singing His Praises, one's Dirt is Washed off,
And the all-consuming poison of Ego departs. ~
One becomes care-free, and abides in Peace.
Cherish then, with every breath, the name of thy Lord.
Shed all thy cleverness, O my mind,
And gather True Riches, in the Society of the Holy.
« Gather thou the Treasure of the Lord’s Name in this True Trade,
| And attain Peace here, and Glory Hereafter.
(But), See they the One alone all over, in all,
In whose Lat it is so Writ by God. [7
Praise the One, and Dwell upon the One alone.
Meditate on the One, seek out the One alone,
Of the One alone, utter a myriad kinds of Praise,
And with thy body and mind, Call on thy only Lord,
He is the One, yea, the One alone :
Yea, He the Perfect One, Pervading all.
Through the One issue forth the many,

)
a
a
(J
alt
f)
fe)
ra
5
é
af
a
af!
a
And he, who Meditates on-the One, his Sins depart. “ 2
His mind and body are Imbued with the One Lord, :
3
a

And, by the Guru’s Grace, Nanak, he knows the One; yea, the One alone. [8-19]
Shaloka

My wanderings are over : I seek Thy Refuge, O God.
Nanak prays Thee : Yoke me to Thy Worship, O Lord !

Ashtapadi

I, Thy Servant, seek a Gift from Thee, O Lord !

Have Mercy on me, and grant me the Gift of Thy Name,

Iseek the Dust of Thy Saint's Feet. .

O Thou, the Transcendent Lord, grant this my Prayer,

That for ever ] Utter Thy Praise, . .

All Call on Thee, with every breath.

And Call upon Thee, day upon day,

And love the Lotus-Feet (of Thee, my Ged),

Thou art my Support, Thou the Refuge,

Nanak seeks Thy Name, which is the Essence of all things. ‘{I]

When the Lord is in Grace, He brings us Bliss, .

But rare is the one who is Blest with the Essence of the Lord.

They who Taste it are satiated,

And become the Perfect ones, unmoved (in Faith).

They are full to the brim with the Love of the Lord,

In the Society of the Holy, Joy is born (in their minds).

They seek (the Lord’s Refuge), shedding all other supports,
And, their inside is [Ilumined, and they are Attuned, night and day, to their God.
Fortunate are they who Dwell on the Lord,

Yea, they, who are Imbued with the Lord’s Name, attain Peace, [2]

The Servant’s Desire is Fulfilled,
And he Receives Pure Instruction from the True Guru.

Page 330 
To His Servant, the Lord is Merciful,

And He Serves him ever and evermore,

His Fetters are Cut off and he is Delivered ;

And ends his Pain of births and deaths and his Doubt departs.

His desire is sated, his Faith fulfilled,

And he Sees ever in his company the Presence of the All-pervading Lord.
He of whom he is, in Him he Merges,

And, Nanak, into the Sanctuary of the Lord's Name he enters. [3]
Why forsake Him who rewards thee! for thy efforts ?

Why forsake Him who acknowledges thy deeds ?

Why forsake Him who Blest thee with all the good things of life ?
Why forsake Him who is the Life of our life T

Why forsake Him who Keeps thee whole in the fire (of the womb) ?
O, rare are those who Realise this by Guru's Grace.

Why forsake Him who pulls thee out of Maya's mire?,

And joins the Cuts of all thy lives,

Nanak has Realised this Truth, through the Perfect Guru,

And so he, Thy Servant, Calls on Thee, O Lord! [4)

O Saints, my friends, do this deed ;

Forsake all else and Meditate on the Lord's Name.

And, through Meditation, attain to the State of Bliss,

And make others too Dwell upon the Treasure of Peace.

In the Love of Worship, do we Swim across the world,

But, without Worship, the dust® will return to dust,

The Lord’s Name is the Treasure of all peace, all joy.

Even the drowning one can one clutch at it, and hold bis mind.
Snapped for ever are all one’s sorrows ;

Remember then, Nanak, the Lord’s Name, the Treasure of Virtue. 5]

Love has sprung from my heart in joy,

For, this, indeed, was the object of my life.

And I See His Sight with my Eyes and get Peace,

And my mind flowers as [ wash the Saint's Feet. '

The body and mind of the Devotees are [mbued with the Lord's Love,
But, rare is the one who finds their holy company.

Bestow this one Gift on me in Thy Mercy, O Lord,

That, by the Guru’s Grace, [ meditate on Thy Name.

Nanak, He, who Pervades all,

His Praise one cannot tell. /6/

The Lord Forgives and is Merciful to the meek.

He's the Lover of the Devotees and for ever Beneficent,
The Support of the supportless, Protector of the earth,
He Pervades all and Sustains all.

The Primeval Person, the Creator and the Cause,

Yea, He, who's the breath of the Devotees’ life.

He, who Meditates (on Him), becomes Pure,

For, he yokes his mind to the Lovet of Lord's Worship.
We are worthless, ignorant wretches, O Mighty Lord,
(And so) we seek Thy Refuge, O God of gods! [7]

He, who Sings (with love) the Praise of the Lord for an instant,
Mounts to all the heavens, and is Delivered and Released.

All pleasures, all dominions, all Glory for him

Are contained in Reciting the Gospel of the Lord's Name.

All his (desire for) foods, clothes, music and all,

Is sated by Uttering ever the Lord’s Name with the tongue.
That Deed is good, and brings Glory and (true) Riches

Which Makes one bide in the heart with the Guru's Word.

Re >

fa une a anh (Fa aa ura) ; lit. He, who (fa) destroys (7S) nor (5) thy efforts (ums),
Lit, poison,

Lit, body.

da (arr) =da, faa.

290

222290 Guru-Granth Subi
Grant me the Society of the Saints, O Lord,
That, gathering Bliss, my heart is Iumined, /8-20]

Shaloka

He is the Absolute One, He the Related ; He isthe One in Primordial Trance’.
All creation is His (and through it) Meditates He upon Himself. [J]

Ashtapadi

When the world of form was not in form,

O whence it was that sin or virtue sprang ?

When He, the Lord, was in the Primordial Trance,

Against whom did He harbour enmity or jealousy ?

When He was not in form nor had colour,

Who, then, could suffer pain or enjoy gladness ?

When He the One was Himself the Transcendent Lord,

Who was then lured by Attachment, who by Doubt ? P, 291
He it is who Played Himself His Sport,

“For,” Says Nanak, “there is no one other than Him’, [J]

When He, the Master, was alone, in Himself,

Who then was Bound, who was Delivered ?

When He, the Unknowable and Vast, was One alone,

Who then did enter the heaven, who the hell ?

When the Absolute Lord was with his innate nature,

Where was then matter, and where was mind ?

When He, the Absolute One, in His Own Light was Merged,

Who then was fearless, who was in fear ?

O, He alone is the Player of His Play.

Nanak : He, the Master, is One, the Unknowable, the Infinite One, [2]
When He, the Immortal Lord, was in His Seat of Peace,

Where were life and death and dissolution then ?

When He, the Perfect Lord, was He in Himself,

Who then was in the fear of destruction and death ?

When the Unmanifest, Incomprehensible Lord was He the One alone,
Of whom then did the Conscious-Unconscious® ask the account ?
When the Master was the One, the Immaculate,

Beyond knowing, beyond the world of senses,

Who then was Bound and who was Released ?

He is Himself the Wonder of wonders :

Nanak : He of Himself came into Being’. /3/

When He, the Lord, the Master, was the One, All-pure,

Then whose sins He Washed, when there was no sin ?

When the Lord, the Formless, Immaculate, was in the State of Nirvan,
Who then was in Honour, who in Dishonour* ?

When the only Form was of the Pure Lord :

Who then was afflicted by Sin and Sorrow 7

When the All-light Abided Merged in the All-light,

Who then was hungry, who then was sated ?

He is the Cause, He the Doer and the Creator,

Nanak : there is no count of the Lord’s Account, [4]

When the Lord’s Glory lay undiffused within Himself,

Who then was the mother, father, friend, son and brother?

When there was none else but He the All-powerful Lord, Wise-in-Himself,
Who then reflected on the Vedas and the Semitic Texts ?

When His Abode was in His Own Heart,

Who then did care for omens, good or bad ?

1. fis RMU) (]a wArit) > When a the Lord was centred in Himself (in the state of Shunya or Absolute Form).
2. fes-aus (fra-qra) : Synderesis or that part of the mind which reprimends us afer a misdeed as against
synteresis. or Dharma, the discriminating part of our mind which distinguishes between geod and evil hefore un act isdone,

3. Guam (ater) : from tia. ’
4. omfanra (afar) una : dishonour. “,

Page 332 www. sikhbookclub. com
Page 333

{ 284 }

When He to Himself was far and near,

Who then was the Master and who the disciple ?

When the Wondrous Lord was Absorbed in His Wonder,

Of that State He Himself alone Knows. /3/

When He Himself was Unenticed, Invulnerable and Mysterious,
Who then was affected by Maya's illusion ?

(When) He the Lord was greeted by His own Being,

The world then functioned not within the three Modes.

When He the One was He the One alone,

Who then was in sorrow, who in joy 7

When He with Himself was self-sausfied,

Who then was the utterer, who the hearer (of His Praise) ?

He is beyond limit, Highest of the high,

And, He alone, Nanak, Reaches Himself. /o/

When He Himself Created the world of form’,

And the world did function within the three Modes,

Then became current the terms Virtue and Sin,

And some craved for heaven, others worked for hell.

And then came the involvement with the world and Maya,

And came the oppression of Ego, Attachment, Doubt and Fear,
Pain and pleasure and honour, dishonour,

And ull kinds of speech to express feelings.

He is the Player of the Play, He the Seer,

And when, Nanak, He Winds it all up, then He alone is, yea, He alone,
Wherever is the Lord’s Devotee, there also is the Immortal Lord.
And whatever is evolved is for the Glory of the Saints,

He is the Lord of both here and Hereafter* ;

And His Praise too Him alone becomes.

He is the Docr of all miracles, all joyous acts,

He that Revels in pleasure, He the one Unattached.

He, on whom is His Grace, to him He imparts His Name,

And makes him Play as He Wills.

He is beyond count, beyond measure, vast and deep,

And anak speaks as Wills his Lord, the God, 8-2/7
Shaloka

O Thou the Master of all life who Pervadeth all :

Thou art the One alone all over ; O, where can I see another? [ he
Ashtapadi

He Himself Recites, He Himself Hears (His Praise).

He Himself is the One, He Himself the many.

When He Wills, He Creates the universe,

And, when He Wills, He Merges it again in Himself.

Without Thee, there is no one, O Lord!

* On Thy String is the whole universe strung.

He, whom Thou makest to Realise (Thy Essence),

He the one Receiveth Thy True Name.

He looks upon all alike, he is the Knower of the Quintessence.
Nanak : he is the Victor of the whole world, /J/

All life is in His Hands,

Who is Merciful to the meek, and Supports the supportless.
He whom He Saves, no one can kill,

And, he alone is dead whom He forsakes.

Forsaking Him, where is one to go ?

For, He, the Immaculate King, is over the heads of us all.
The secret of life is in His Hands :

Know thou Him to be ever with thee, both within and without.
He is Treasure of good, Limitless and Infinite ;

Nanak is ever a Sacrifice unto the Lord, /2/

P. 292

[7]

1. umlg (oxy) : (Sans. dq), the visible world or universe which is illusory and the scene of manifold actions.
, 2 Lit, both sides.

2290 Gure-Granth Sahi
The Perfect, the All-merciful One, Fills all :
And He Blesses all with His manifold Bounties,
He Himself alone Knows His Own Doings,
\ Yea, He, the Knower of thy innerself, Pervading all. “
He Sustains life in many ways,
And all that He Creates Meditates upon Him.
He Unites with Himself whomsoever He likes,
And he then Worships Him and Sings His Praise.
His mind Believes, and keeps faith with the Lord,
Nanak : He, the Cause of causes, is One and One alone, [3]

The Lord's Servant is dedicated only to the Name (of the Lord),

And none of his wishes goes in vain.

The Servant's Lot is but to Serve

And, knowing the Lord's Will, attain to the highest Bliss.

Beyond this, there is no thought in him

In whose mind Dwells the Absolute God.

God cuts his Fetters off and he becomes free of envy,

And Worships he the Guru's Feet, day and night.

This life he passes in Peace ; in Peace does he dwell in the Yond ;

Nanak : him the Lord Himself Unites with Himself. [4] P. 293.

p)
a
C)
)
3
alt
FJ
&)
Bathe in Bliss in the Society of the Holy, 3
And Sing the Praises of the Supreme Bliss, J
And Dwell on the Essence, the Name of the Lord, 3
And Save thus thy precious body.
Sing thou the Praises of the Lord through the Word : 3
For, this is the only object of thy life.
See the Lord’s Presence near, at all times, 8
Thy Ignorance will depart and thy Darkness dispelled. 8
Keep thou the (Guru's) Instruction in thy heart : ‘ 3
And, gather the Fruit of thy Mind's Desire. [5]
ry
6)
a)
é)
a
J)
&)
&)
&
&)
f)
&)
‘J
f
e)
ef
=
p)
F)
&)
3
a
a
ft

Save thyself both here and Hereafter

By wearing the Lord’s Name in thy heart.

The Perfect Guru but gives Perfect Instruction,

And he, in whose heart it dwells, Knows the Truth.
Medidate on the Lord’s Name, body and soul,

And thy Sorrow and Pain and Fear will depart,
Trade thou in Truth, O thou True Trader, .

That thy Merchandise lasts even in the Other World.
Keep thou the Support of the One in thy mind,

And thy comings and goings will cease for ever, [6]

Where can one run away from Him, the Lord,

For, one is Saved only by Meditation on one’s sole Protector.
He, who Medilates on the Fearless One, loses all his fear,
And so by the Grace of God is he Released.

He, whom He keeps, him no one can harm,

And he, who Calls on the Lord's Name, attains Peace of mind.
His worrying goes, and goes also his Ego,

Him no one can equal, nay, no one can.

Over his head stands the Lord of Power,

And all his wishes are Fulfilled. {7/

He, whose Instruction is Perfect, from whose Presence rains Nectar,
He, by whose Sight the whole world is Saved ;

He, whose Lotus-Feet is Beauteous beyond measure,

He, whose Sight Saves, enchanting is whose Beauty,

Blessed is His Service, Blessed is the Servant.

He, the Lord, is the Inner-knower, He the All-mighty Person,

He, in whose heart He Dwells, is Saved,

And, lo, Death touches him not,

And he attains the State of Immortality.

Nanak : Him thou Remember, joining the Society of the Holy, [8-22]

Gurn-Crnth Sahih 990009¢2299999999999092099999999090007229908
Page 33

Shaloka

The Guru Blessed me with the collyrium of Wisdom and my Darkness of Ignorance was dispelled,
Lo, by the Grace of God, I met the Saint and my mind was Illumined. [1]

Ashtapadi

In the Society of the Holy, I Saw the Lord within myself.,
And I loved the Sweet Name of the Lord.

All things are contained in the heart of the One

Who appears as many in His Manifold Play,

The Nectar-Name of the Lord is to me the nine treasures:
And its Seat is in the human body itself.

And my mind is held‘, and I Hear the Celestial Music,
Of which I cannot tell, so wondrous is its ecstasy.

He alone Realises this whom the Lord makes thus to Realise,
And he, Nanak, becomes All-knowing, All-wise. [1]

He is inside of us who, the Limitless One, is also without :
And pervades all hearts, our Lord, the God.

He is on the earth and sky and in the underworld,

And wholly Fills He the whole universe. P. 294
He is in all vegetation, and over the mountains,

And we all do the deeds as He Wills.

He is in the air and water and fire,

And, in the four quarters and ten directions,

No place there is without the Lord,

By the. Grace (of that) God, O Nanak, one attains Peace. [2]
View Him thou in the Vedas, the Puranas and Smiritis :
In the sun, the moon, the stars? is He the One alone.

All recite but His Word,

Who the Lord [Immovable wavers not.

He the All-powerful Lord but Plays His Play,

(But), we find not his precious Worth, His Virtues are beyond value.
He, whose Light informs the Souls of all,

He Pervades all, everywhere, up and down, across.

By the Guru’s Grace, he, whose Doubt departs,

He, Nanak, has faith in God. /3/

The Saints See nought but the Lord.

In the hearts of the Saints abides nothing but Faith.

The Saints hear only what is good and holy:

And He, who Pervades all, in Him they Merge,

This is the Way of those who Know.

The Saints say only what is eternally True,

He, who Believes that the Cause and the Creator is He the One,
Enjoys Peace m whatever falls to his lot.

He, the Lord, Abides within us and also without.

Nanak : His Presence bewitches us all. [4]

True is the Lord, True is His Creation,

He is the only Lord who Creates all.

If He Wills, He becomes the many :

And, if He so Wills, He Becomes the One alone.

His Power is vast, one cannot know,

He, on whom is His Grace, Unites with the Lord,

Who shall we sav is near, who is far ?

When all over He, the One, Filleth all.

He, whom He enables to See Him within himself,

He alone, Nanak, Knows of Him, [35/

In all forms, is He the One :

Through all eyes, Sees no one >i He.

All His Creation is His Body,

He Himself Hears His own Praise.

SCBAGCOSHCOSCCEECOCECOCCOCOCOCECECECECBCEBECOG

%.

I. Zit, in deep trance.

2. ARba (wetaz) : (Sans. afer moon) ; qu (Sans. gz sun) ; Aya (Sans. qa str_.,
20 Guru-Granth Salib
Page 33

%

© COSCSSSOCHSOCHOSCHSSOSSSOSCOS COSC EGSESCOCHGASS

ate

It is all His Play, this coming and going,

And Maya too works within His Will. .
He, living in the midst of all, remains detached,

And Himself Says whatever He wants to Say.

In His Will alone do we come and go;

And when sucl be His Will, Nanak, He Merges us in Himself. [6]

Whatsoever He Does, is never bad :

(For), Who else can do a thing but our only Lord 7

All Good is He, good are His Deeds,

And He alone Knows what is in His heart.

‘True is He, True is His Creation,

Up, down and across it is He who Pervades (all).

No one can tell His State, His Way.

If there were another like Him, only he could tell :

All that He Does, all that 1s Approved,

Says Nanak : “Know ye this by the Guru’s Grace’, [7/

He, who Knows Him, gathers eternal Peace,

And, him the Lord Unites with Himself.

He is truly Rich, of High Birth, of Glory great,

And is Released while alive, who keeps the Lord in his heart,

Blessed, Blessed, Blessed is his life,

By whose Grace, the whole world is Saved.

This is the sole end of one’s life,

That in the Society of the Lord’s Servants one Remembers the Lord’s Name.
He is Delivered, and Delivers he the whole world.

Nanak : to such a one I pay my obeisance ever. [8-23]

Shaloka

T Called on the Perfect One whose Name is Perfect,
And, I Attained to Him, so | Praise my Lord. [J]

Ashtapadi

Hear thou the Instruction of the Perfect Guru,

And See near thy Transcendent Lord.

Utter with every breath, the Name of Govind,

And, the affliction of thy mind departs.

Forsake thy transient desires welling up in thee,

And ask for the Dust of the Saint's Feet.

Forget thyself and pray to thy Lord,

And Swim across the Ocean of Fire, joining the Society of the Holy.
Thou shalt then gather the Treasure of the Lord's Name.

Nanak pays obeisance to such a Perfect Guru, [J]

All Joy, all Peace*, all Poise, all Bliss,

Is in the Meditation on the Supreme Bliss in the company of the Holy.
Escape the Hell and Save thy soul,

And Drink the Nectar of the Lord's Praise.

Remember the One Lord only in thy mind,

Whose Form is one, but manifestations many.

He, who Sustains the earth, Damodara, who is all Mercy to the meek,
The Dispeller of Sorrow, the Perfect, Beneficent One :

Dwell on Him ever and for evermore.’

This, Nanak, is the (true) Support of thy Soul. /2/]

Glorious are the words of the Saints :

Beyond value are these Pearls and Jewels.

He, who hears them and practises them, Saves himself.

He himself Swims Across (the Sea of Material Existence) and makes others too Swim Across,
Blessed, Blessed is his life : Blessed, Blessed his company,

Whose mind is Attuned to the Love of the Lord,

1. By (24) : (Sans. am, peace) ; ane (eee) : (Sans. wma, happiness),
Guru-Granth Sahib 999999999999999999999999999999999999008999099090%

P. 2595

PABECECECECOBEBESSOCCCOCCOREOEOESEECEEECEC CSSEECASSECECSCECSSRSSTESSS COBO BOSGBOG

Page 33
[ 288 ]

Hail to him ; within him Rings the Celestial Music :

And Hearing it he is joyed ; for, God Speaks through bim.
The Holy one, whose forehead sparkles with the Light of the Lord,
Has Saved Nanak by his Holy Presence. [3

Hearing that Thou art the only Refuge, I have sought Thee.
Have Thy Mercy upon me that I may Unite with Thee.

J am jealous of no one : ] have become the Dust of all :
And ] Recite Thy Nectar Name in the Society of the Holy.
And Thou, the God of gods, art Pleased with me,

And so the Service of Thy Servant hath availed.

My involvements are over : my Sins depart,

By tolling the Name of the Lord with the tongue.

By Thy Grace, Thou hast become Merciful to me,

And [ reap Profit in the (Life's) Trade. [4/

Praise the Lord, ye saintly friends,

By being of one mind and ever-alert.

Through this “Chant of Peace’ Rings the Praise of the Lord's Name ; it brings Poise and Peace,

He, in whose mind it Dwells becomes the Treasure of Good.

His desires are all fulfilled ;

And he, the first amongst men, is acclaimed the world over,

He attains the most Exalted Seat,

And his comings and goings cease for ever.

He alone reaps the Profit of the Lord’s Name,

Who Receives it by His Grace. 5]

Mercy, peace, riches, the nine treasures,

Wisdom and all miraculous powers,

Knowledge, (the merit of ) austerity, and yoga—are all in the Remembrance of the Lord’s Name. P, 296
To gather Holy Wisdom is the highest Piety : ‘
Through which come the four life-objects and flowers the Lotus (of oné’s Mind). . :
He, though in the midst of all, is then attached to none,

He is Beauteous, Wise, the Knower of the Essence,

Looking on all alike, Seeing the One always in all.

This fruit falls into the mouth of the one,

Who hearkens to the Guru's Word with his whole mind. [6]

This then is the Treasure (of Peace) : but rare is the one whose mind Dwells on it.
(But) he, who does so, is the only one to be Saved in the whole age.

His Speech is the Praise of the Lord, his Song the Master’s Name :

The Vedas, the Shastras and the Smiritis also say the same,

The Essence of all faiths is contained in the Lord's Name.

The Devotee of the Lord attains the Peace of mind.

Myriads of our Sins are Washed off in the Society of the Saints.

By the Saint's Mercy, one is Relased from the Yama's (Noose).

But he in whose Lot it is so writ by God,

He alone, Nanak, seeks the Refuge of the Saint, {7}

He, who hears this chant with love, and in whose heart it Dwells,

He Cherishes in his mind his Lord, the God.

And his comings and goings are ended,

And his precious life is instantly Fulfilled.

His repute is Pure, ambrosial is his speech,

And in his mind Dwells the One Name of the Lord.

His Sorrow, Sickness, Doubt and Fear depart

And he is called a Saint, and Pure are all his deeds,

Highest of the high his Glory is :

Nanak, for these merits, I've named this chant “The Song of Peace”, [8-24]

290 Guru-Grasth Subtb
Page 33
Thitti' Gauri M. 5
By the Grace of the Gue Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Bulightener.

Shaloka

The Master, our Creator, Pervades the earth, the waters and the interspace :
Yea, Manifests He in a myriad ways, though He is our One and the only Creator-Lord. ///

Pauri (Ekam)

Our Lord and Master is the only Creator-Lord of the universe ;
I salute Him, therefore, and Meditate u a Him :

And I Sing His Praise and seek His Re
I rest my Hope on Him to attain Bliss an Redemption, for, He is my only All-powerful Lord,

I have wandered in all directions, but known not another without Him.

I've listened to the Vedas, the Puranas and the Smiritis and reflected on them in many, many ways,
But, I found my Lord alone to be the Saviour of Sinners,

And the Dispeller of Fear, the Ocean of Peace, the One Formless He.

He is the Giver and the Enjoyer of His Gifts : ‘there is no place but His for us to go to.

And he, who Sings His Praise, attains whatever he seeks from Him. [1]

Let's Sing the Praises of our Lord ever and for evermore

And Contemplate Him in the Society of the Saints, [J-Pause]

Shaloka

I salute my Lord a myriad times and seek His Refuge.
And so I still my Doubts, and, associating with the Saints, shed my sense of Duality. [2]

Pauri (Dutia)

Scrub the mind clean of Evil and Serve ever thy Guru.

You'll treasure in your mind and body the Jewel of the Lord on shedding your Lust, Wrath and Greed,

You'll attain Eternal life and overcome Death and all your Woes will depart.

When you shed your selfhood and Contemplate your Lord, the Love-worship of the Lord comes into
you, . 297

And you reap Profit and Lose no more,

And are Honoured at the Lord’s Court.

They, who gather the Riches of the Lord’s Name, are truly Rich and are men of Destiny.

So Contemplate the Lord upstanding and downsitting and Cherish the Love of the Saints.

Says Nanak : “‘They, who Cherish their Lord in their minds, shed their Evil”. [2

Shaloka

The world is in the grip of the three Modes, and the Fourth State (of Bliss) only the rare ones attain,
Says Nanak : ‘The Saints are Pure, for, they treasure their Lord in their minds.” /3/ .

Pauri (Tritia)

They, who are bound dows by the three Modes gather Poison as the fruit thereof ; they are now good,
now bad.

They shuttle between heaven and hell and Death ever hangs over their heads.

Gripped by Doubt and pain and pleasures of the world, they pass their days in Ego.

They know not their Creator-Lord and pursue other means (of Deliverance).

The are attacked by the afflictions of the mind, body and Soul ; and their Pain leaves them not.

They realise not the Glory of their All-perfect, Transcendent Lord,

And are Drowned in the Sea of Doubt and Attachment and abide they in the deeps of Hell,

Says Nanak : “Have Mercy on me, Lord, and Save me, for I rest my Hope on Thee alone, 3)

Shaloka

He alone is Wise and Cultured who sheds his Ego.
So Contemplate thou the Name of the Lord and thou wilt attain the four life-objects and the eight
miraculous powers. [4]

Pauri (Chaturathi)

I heard all the four Vedas and, finding the essence of their teachings,
Realised that if one Contemplates the Name of the Lord, he gathers the Treasure of Bliss, and is
Emancipated,

1. The fourteen aspects of the moon, on which this composition is based.

Guru-Grinth Sahib O9e9T2e2290090¢
Page 338 

‘
[ 290 ]

~ And he overcomes Hell, and sheds all his Woes, and all his Afflictions are past.
. And he overpowers Death and falls not a prey to the Yama and the Lord’s Praise sinks in him.
He's rid of Fear, and (the Lord's) Nectar pecvades his body and Soul ; he is Imbued with the Love of
the Absolute Lord.
And he sheds his Pain and Poverty and Sin and His mainstay is the (Lord's) Name.
All the angels and scers are in search of the Lord, the Ocean of Peace.
Says Nanak : “Their minds are Pure and their Faces sparkle who become the Dust to be treaded over

by the Saints”. /4/
Shaloka

They, who are engrossed in Maya, and in whose minds abide the five Sins,
Become Pure in the Society of the Saints, inebriated with the Love of the Lord. /3/

Pauri (Panchami)

They are the Elect of God who know the True support of the world.

For the alluring ramifications of the world are false like the fading scent of flowers.

We see not, nor do we know, nor do we reflect on this :

For, such is our intoxication with the flavours of the world and we are, steeped in Ignorance.

We come and go and pass through endless transmigrations and do (pious) deeds of various kinds,
But we Contemplate not our Creator-Lord, nor do we achieve a sense of Discrimination,

Says Nanak : “Rare are they, who are inebrialed with the Love-worship of the Lord,

And dre contaminated not by Maya, nor fall a prey to the snares of the world.” [5]

Shaloka

The six Shastras proclaim that the Lord is Infinite : ;
The Devotees of the Lord look Beauteous when they Praise their Lord at His Gate. [6/

Pauri ( Khastami)

Say the six Shastras and the Smiritis that the Lord is Infinite. P. 298

He's Highest of the high, the Sublime, the Transcendent Lord and even the Sheshnaga’ knows not the
limits of His Praise.

Narada Sings of His Praise as do other seers and Vyasa and his son, Sukdeva,

The rod Devotees are for ever inebriated with the Lord’s Essence and the Lord Fills their
whole being.

He, who's ushered into the Sanctuary of the Beneficent Lord, his Attachment and Ego and Doubt are
stilled,

And he Cherishes the Lord’s Lotus-Feet in his mind and he is Blest with the Vision of the Lord.

He reaps Profit : he Loses no more by Attuning himself 1o the Lord in the Society of the Saints.

He in-gathers the Treasure of the Lord’s Merit, and Dwells he ever on the Lord’s Name. [6]

Shaloka

In the Society of the Saints, one Utters the Praise of the Lord and Speaks Truth with Love.
Says Nanak ; ‘One's mind is then Content, for, one is Attuned to one’s only God.” [7]

Pauri (Saptami)

Gather thou the Riches of the Lord’s Name : for, this Treasure goes not.

One gathers in the Society of the Saints the Treasure of which there is no limit,

He who overcomes his self and Contemplates the Lord, and seeks the Refuge of God, the King,

He sheds his- Woes and Swims across the Sea of Material Existence and gathers the Fruit of his heart's
Desire. :

Blessed and Fruitful and Approved is the life which Contemplates its Lord night and day,

And keeps company with the Lord within and without and Knows its Creator-Lord.

He is our only friend and mate who instructs us in the Wisdom of the Lord,

Nanak is a Sacrifice unto him who Contemplates his Lord ever and for evermore. [7]

Shaloka

Let us shed all cares and Contemplate our Lord day and night.
The Couriers of Death will then eye us not and the Lord will be in His Mercy upon us. /&8/

1. AY (@a)=Axaa, the thousand-tongued serpent who is supposed to utter eternally with each tongue a new
name of the Lord.

Page 33
Pauri (As/itami)

(He, who Contemplates the Lord) attains eight miraculous powers and the nine Treasures.
He gathers all the life-objects, and becomes All-wise.

The ‘Lotus’ (of his mind) Flowers and he is ever in Bliss :

His ways ate Pure and his Manfram is never-failing,

He attains all the Merits of Dharma, and ablutions,

And his Wisdom is of the highest order.

One Contemplates one’s Lord in the Society of the Perfect Guru :

And so is one Emancipated by Contemplating the (Lord’s) Name in the Lord’s Love. [8/

Shaloka

He who Contemplates not the Lord and is enticed away by Evil and Desire,
And forsakes the (Lord's) Name, lands now in heaven, now hell. [9/

Pauri (Naumi)

The nine organs of the body become Impure

If one Contemplates not the (Lord's) Name and goes the wrong Way,

And goes to another's woman and slanders the Saints,

And hears not even an iota of the Lord's Praise ;

And steals another's ducs to fill his stomach,

His Fire is quenched not : his Desire is not stilled.

Without the Service of the Lord such are the man’s deserts !

He, the Unfortunate one, who forsakes his God, is born (only) to die again and again, [9]

Shaloka

I have searched in all directions : wherever I See, I See no one but the Lord :
And, our mind is held only if the Lord is in utter Mercy. [/0/

Pauri (Dasamt)

He, who overpowers his ten sense organs,
Is Content and Contemplates his Lord,
And Hears the Praise of Gopal,

And Sees no one but the Compassionate Saint,

And Utters the Infinite Praises of the Lord, P. 299
And Cherishes the Perfect God in his mind,
And with hands and feet Serves he the Saint.

Nanak : Blessed is he, but this self-discipline one practises by the Grace of God.. [10]
Shaloka

Let us Utter the Name of the One Lord alone : but rare isthe one who Knows its Taste.
We Know not all the Merits of the Lord, Nanak, for, He is so Wondrous and’ Mysterious. J]

Pauri

On the day of Ekdads/, Realise thou that thy Lord is so near,
And discipline thy desire* and hearken to the Lord's Name,
And be Content in thy mind and be Compassionate to all life,
Thus will thy fast? fruition and be complete.

Hold thy wandering mind and fix it on a single point.
And if thou Contemplatest the Lord’s Name, thy body and mind will become Pure.

The Lord Pervades all beings :
So Sing thou the Lord’s Praise, for, this alone is thy eternal Dharma, [I1}

Shaloka
When I shed the Evil of my mind and through Service met with the Compassionate Saint,
1 Attained to my Lord and all my cares were past. {/2]

I. Zé, doors.
2. Lif, sex,
3. The fast that the devout keep on the day of Ekiidsi.

Page 34
[ 292 ]
Panori \
On the day of Duadsi, Dedicate thyself to the (Lord’s) Name, to Charity and the Cleansing (of the
mind),

And, shed thy Ego and Contemplate thy Lord.

And in the Society of the Saints, Drink the Nectar of thy Lord,-

And thy mind will be satiated by the loving Adoration of thy God.

Then thou utterest sweet speech which soothes all.

All thy mind, the subtle essence of the five elements, finds sustenance in the Lord’s Name.
This is the Faith that one gathers from the Perfect Guru,

And, one Merges in one's Lord, and is cast not into the womb again. [J2/

Shaloka

One is Fulfilled not, if one acts within the three Modes, :
‘Only when the Lord, the Purifier of the Sinners, is treasured by the mind and one Contemplates the
Lord’s Name that one is Emancipated. /13/

Pauri (Tratdyi)

The world is afflicted by the three Modes,

And so it comes and goes and falls into Hell.

For, man Cherishes not the Lord’s Praise in the mind,

And Sings not the Praise of the Ocean of Peace even for an instant. .
He's an embodiment of pain and pleasure, .
And is afflicted by the incurable and chronic Malady of Maya.

He practises Evil by day and thus tires himself out.

And though (at night) there's sleep in his eyes, in dream he barks out (his hidden desires),

This is the state of one who forsakes his Lord,

So, Nanak seeks the Refuge of the Lord, the Compassionate God, [13]

Shaloka

The Lord Pervades all the four directions and the fourteen spheres’.
. Nanak ; His Deeds are ever Perfect and He does not an imperfect thing, [/4]

Pauri (Chaudeh)

In all the four corners, there is no one other than the Lord.
His Glory is Perfect and He Abides in all the worlds.
. In the ten directions is also He the Lord alone :
See thou thy Lord on the earth and on the skies.
He's on the earth and over the waters and mountains and in woods and the underworlds.
He, our Compassionate Lord, Abides in all, all over.
In the subtle as in the apparent is He, the All-powerful Master :
So Realise thou Him, Nanak, through the Mercy of the Guru. /J4]

Shaloka

Conquer thy self and Sing the Praises of the Lord, through the Guru's Word,
And thy fear will be stilled by the Saint's Grace and thy care will depart. /J5/

WC CCOSCECCCOCCCEECOEECECEOCCOCES

Pauri (Amavas)

My Soul is in Peace, I am Content with my Lord, P. 300
My body and mind are Cooled, and are in Equipoise, and I've Dedicated myself to the Service of God,
My Bonds are loosed : I've overcome my Evil and I am Fulfilled.

My mind is rid of Sin and Ego by Contemplating the Lord's Name.

Now that I’ve sought the Refuge of the Transcendent Lord, my comings and goings have ceased.

I Utter the Praises of the Lord and so I've Swum across along with my Kindreds (the Sea of Existence).
And now I Serve no one other than my Lord, and Contemplate only the Lord’s Name.

I've attained Peace and Bliss from the Perfect Guru. /15/

1. Seven under-worlds and seven heavens, according to the Semitic belief.

Page 34
He, whom the Lord made Perfect, wavers not (in Faith) ;
His Glory increases with each day, Nanak : he Loses in nothing. [16]

Pauri (Purnima) 53
The Lord alone is Perfect, the All-powerful, the Cause of causes,

Compassionate to all life, who Protects all ;

The Treasure of Virtue, the Supporter of the earth, the Enlightener, who Causes all that happens.

The Inner-knower, the All-wise, the Master, the Unknowable, Immaculate He :

Our Transcendemt Lord, our Sublime God, who Knows the state of all,

The Supporter of the Saints, worthy of giving Refuge, I salute Him day and night.

The Mystery of His Unutterable Gospel one knows not, so fix thy mind on the Lord’s Feet,

ee ee ee of the Sinners, the Support of the supportless : Nanak seeks the Refuge of such a

Sheloka

’ My Afflictions are over, my Doubt is stilled, when I seek the Refuge of my Lord, the King.
And, Fulfilled am I and I Praise my Lord, the God. [17]

Pauri

Some Sing and some Hear and others Reflect (on the Gospel of the Lord).

Some Instruct others in the Lord’s Wisdom ; others enshrine that Wisdom in the Mind: both are thus
Blest and Saved.

The Sins of such beings are Washed off and they become Pure, having rid themselves of the Dirt of ages,

Their Faces Sparkle both here and Hereafter, and Maya contaminates them not.

He alone is high-minded, he alone is a Vaishnava, he alone is Wise and Rich,

And of high Caste and Mighty who Worships the Lord, the Builder of our Destiny,

The Brahmins, the Kshartriyas, the Vaishas, the Shudras, and even the low wretches are all Emancipated
Contemplating their Lord.

He, who Knows his only Lord, Nanak supplicates before him’, [17]

Var of Gauri M. 4
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Lulightener.

Shaloka M. 4

My Perfect Guru, the Purusha, is Compassionate to all ; for Him all are alike.

He Sees all with the same eye, but only those Attain to Him whose hearts are Pure.

Nectar abides in the Body of my Eternal Guru ; He is Sublime ; His Station is High.

Says Nanak an Worship our Lord by His Grace, and those turned God-wards alone attain to
Him.” [I] :

M. 4 :

Maya and T-amness are a Poison ; men of the world are always the Losers.

The True Riches are the Lord’s and he alone attains them who, by the Guru's Grace, Reflects on the Word,

One is rid of the Poison of Ego if one Ensbrines the Lord’s Nectar in one’s heart.

They are Fulfilled for ever on whom is the,Lord’s Grace. P, 301

Says Nanak : “They, whom the Lord of Himself Unites with Himself, alone have. Met their Creator-
Lord." /2] .

Pauri

Thou art my only True Lord and Master.

Everyone calls on Thee : all repair to Thy Feet.

Thy Praise is Glorious and he who Says it, is Saved. .
They, who turn Thy-wards, Fruition, and they Merge in Thy True Name.
O Thou, my Supreme Lord, Sublime is Thy Glory. /1)

Shaloka M, 4

To Praise any thing but the Lord's Name is vain. ;
The self-wise praise their own Ego, and prattle about ‘me and mine’.

1. Lit. becomes his dust. -

BABELCCCECCCHSESSESE HOOCHOSSECHCOCECOCELE BOS GESSESECUCE SOSLSSCCOGEGGRGGG

Ss

GuruGranth Balpb 9999299999999999999292999999999999998229 99999999"

Page 34
[ 294 ]

But that what they praise goes in the end and is laid waste.
But those turned God-wards are Emancipated, for, they Contemplate the Lord of Supreme Bliss, [J]

M. 4

O my True Guru, lead me on to my Lord and Master, that [ Dwell upon His Name in my mind.
For, the Name of the Lord is Pure and, whosoever Utters it, is rid of all his Woes. {2/

Pauri

Thou art my only Self-existent Lord, Formless and Uncontaminated by Maya, my King.
They, who Dwell upon Thee with a single mind, them Thou riddest of all their Afflictions.
No one equals Thee ; so how shall Praise any as Thy equal ?

No one is a greater Giver than Thou, my Immaculate Lord, the Eternal Truth whom I crave.
Q my True Master, how True is Thy Name! [2]

Shaloka’M. 4

The ndind of the self-centred Evil-doers is strayed by Doubt and afflicted by Ego.
Says Nanak : “He, who’s rid of this Affliction, meets with the Saint, the True Guru, our Eternal Friend.

fj
/M. 4

The mind of the God-awaked Souls is Imbued with the Love of the Lord, the Treasure of Virtue.
Nanak seeks the Refuge of the Lord who's met by the Guru’s Grace, [2]:

Panri

Thou, my Creator-Lord, the Purusha, art Unfathomable : with whom am I to compare’ Thee ?
If there were any Thy equal, I'll Praise Thee like him, but Thou art Thy own only peer.

Thou Pervadest all hearts alike, but Thou art Revealed only to those turned Thy-wards.

Thou art the Master, the True Spouse of all ; the Highest of the high.

And that alone happens what Thou Willest, O True One, why should I be afflicted by care? [3]

Shaloka M. 4

My body and mind are ever Imbued with my Lord’s Love :
Ee Thou Merciful, O God, that I Abide in the Guru's Peace. [J]

M. 4

They, who treasure their Lord's Love, look Beauteous-‘in howsoever they Utter the Lord's Praise :
For, the Lord Knows their minds, and it is He who has Yoked them to His Love. [2]

Paori

Thou, my Creator-Lord, errest not ; for,’ Thou-canst do no wrong,

And whatever Thou Dost is good ; this j is the Mystery that the Guru's Word has Revealed to me.

Thou art All-powerful, the Cause ‘of causes, and there’s no one other than Thee.

Thou, my Master, art Deep and’ Compassionate ; and all but Dwell upon Thee. P, W2
All life belongs to Thee and Thou belongest to all ; yea, Thou Deliverest all, /4/]

Shaloka M. 4

O my Friend and Mate, hearken to my message of Love; my eyes are Attuned to my Lord.
And the Guru being Merciful to me,I have Met with my Friend,and so I abide in Peace. [JJ

M.4

The True Beneficent Guru is for ever Compassionate :

And he is without envy too, and looks upon all as the creatures of the one Creator-Lord. .

They who are inimical to such a Guru, are never Fulfilled.

For, the True Guru wishes well of everyone : why should others wish ill of him ?

As is the state of one’s mind so gathers he the fruit from the True Guru :

For, the Lord, our Creator, is the Innet-knower of all, and no one can hide his self from Him. [2]

«

1. wabh (agit) = efsoreté, Le. compare.

Page 343 
He, whom the Lord Blesses, alone is great.

Yea, the Lord Forgives whomsoever He Wishes to and, then, him He Loves,

He who tries to mimic his ways, is a fool among fools,

For he, whom the True Guru Unites with the Lord, Utters nothing but the Lord's Praise,

Says Nanak: “The True One alone is True and he who knows this, Merges in the (Lord's)
Truth”. /5/ ‘

Shaloka M, 4

My True, Immaculate and Eternal Lord is without fear, without hate, the Formless He.

They, who Contemplate Him with single-minded Devotion, shed their load of Ego.

They, who Worshipped their Lord, victory be to such Saintly beings.

They, who slander the Perfect and the True Guru, them the whole world curses.

For, within the True Guru the Lord Himself Abides and Works, and Protects He him Himself,

And, the Guru for ever Utters the Praises of the Lord : greetings be to the Guru.

Nanak is a Sacrifice unto him who Contemplates the Creator-Lord. [J]

M. 4

Thou of Thyself Created the earth and the sky.

Thou of Thyself Created the humankind and gave Sustenance to all.

It is Thou alone who Workest all over, Thou, the Treasure of Virtues :

Dwell thou, Nanak, on the :Lord’s Name that thou art rid ofall thy Sins. [2]

Pauri :

Thou art my True Lord, and Thou lovest nothing but the Truth.

O True One, whosoever Sings Thy Praise, the Couriers of Death come not near him.
They, who Love Thee from their heart, their Faces Sparkle at Thy Gate,

The False ones are left behind : having Falsehood in their hearts, they suffer Pain,
Blackened are the Faces of the False ones : the False ones remain but False,

Shaloka M, 4

The True Guru is the field of Dharma : in it as one sows, 80 One reaps.

The Guru's Devotees sow the seed of (the Lord's) Nectar and Taste the fruit of Nectar too.

Their Countenances Sparkle both here and Hereafter ; and they are Robed with Honour at the Lord's
True Court.

In the hearts of others is Evil, they practise Evil : and so whatever they sow, they eat the fruit thereof.

P. 303

For, when the True Guru, the Tester, Testeth, the inner selfishness’ of everyone comes off.

One is known for what one is : and as is one’s mind, so is one rewarded by the Lord.

Says Nanak: “At either end the Lord alone Acts; and His miracles He Himself Works and
Oversees”, {JJ

M.4

Man is endowed with one mind, and with it he acts: and to whatever his mind is dedicated, that he
receives,

One may Prattle as much as one may, (but) one eats only what one has.

Without the True Guru, one Awakens not, nor one's Epo goes.

The Egotists are afflicted with Pain and Hunger : they beg for Alms from door to door.

For, their Guile and False nature is hid not for long and they show us their true colour one day,

He, in whose Lot it is so Writ by God, he’s met by the True Guru and God,

As iron rubbed with the Philosopher's stone becomes gold, so is the man transmuted by the Society of

the Saints. :
O Lord, Thou art the All-powerful Master of Nanak, so lead him Thou on as Thou Willest. /2/

Pauri

He, who Dwells on the Lord in his heart, him the Lord Meets of Himself.

For, he keeps company with Virtue, and with the fire of the Word burns off all his Sins.

The Sins are bought cheap like straw ; but the Merits he alone gathers whom the Lord Blesses.

Sacrifice am I unto my Guru who erased my Sins and Revealed my Virtues, .

Glorious is the Praise of our Sublime Lord; but it is only those turned God-wards who Utter this
Praise. [7] :

Shaloka M, 4
Glory be to the True Guru who Contemplates ever the Lord's Name,
All discipline, all ablution, for him lies in Uttering the Lord's Praise ; with the Lord’s Name alone is he

satiated.

1. margaila (arate) : (Persian, rzalts), (the coins) of pure gold.

Page 34
Page 345

[ 296 }

The Lord’s Name is our only Power, our only Court, our ouly Protection and Refuge. ;

And ae who Worships the Guru's Being with single-minded Devotion, he gathers the Fruit of his heart's
esire. —

He, who slanders the Perfect and True Guru, him the Creator-Lord Destroys.

And to him opportunity comes not again, and he cats what he has sown.

He's thrown into the deeps of Hell, his Face is Blackened and he’s driven, bound like a thief.

(But), if he then seeks again the Refuge of the True Guru, he’s Saved if he Dwells on the Lord's Name,

Such, Nanak, is the Lord’s Will : and I utter only what my God Wills me to utter. [1]

M. 4

He, who submits not to the Command of the Perfect Guru, he, the self-centred, ignorant one, i5 lured
away by the Poison of Maya,

His heart is filled with Falsehood and he knows nothing but Falsehood and God involves him in
fruitless® Strife. :

He prattles all-too-much, but no one likes what he blurts out.

Like nae he serves too many masters and whosoever kecps his company, his repute is

Ssoned.

Those tirned God-wards remain Detached and away from him, for, they keep company with no one but
the Guru.

© my friends, the Elect of the Lord, he who hides the identity of his Guru, gathers no Profit. P. 304

Says Nanak on the testimony of the Shastras* and the Vedas* and the Word of the Perfect Guru, which
is the most authentic of all :

That it becomes the Lord's Devotees to Praise their Perfect Guru ; while the Egocentrics rue the day
they missed to Praise Him. [2]

Pauri

The True One alone is great : (but), he alone Attains to Him whom the True Guru Blesses®.

The True Guru is he who Contemplates the True Onc : the True Guru and the True God are one.

The True Guru is he, the Purusta, who overwhelms his five desires,

They, who Serve not the Guru and abide in Ego, within them is Falsehood : ©, cursed be their beings.

bier er they utter is of no avail ; their Countenances are Blackened and they are bereft of the Guru's
race,

Shaloka M. 4

The body is the Lord’s Farm ; the Lord Himself has yoked us to culture it.

The godly beings grow (the Lord's Name) by His Grace, while the Egotists lose even their Self.

All sow the seed for their good ; but that alone grows which the Lord likes.

The Devotees of the Guru sow the seed of (the Lord’s) Nectar, and so they reap the fruit of the Nectar-
ame.

The mouse of the Yama ever picks at the crop (of life), but our Creator-Lord drives it out of ourselves.

The Crop grows through the Lord’s Love, and is Cut and Stacked by the Lord's (Grace.

_All their Woes and Afflictions are past who Contemplate their True Guru, the Purusha.

Says Nanak : “He, who Contemplates the (Lord’s) Name, Swims Across himself ; nay, Emancipates he
the whole world”, i) .

M.4

The whole day the Egocentric is concerned with vain desires :

At night, he is overwhelmed by sleep and all his nine organs are out of tune,

He is overpowered by his woman and obeys her he like a bond-slave,

How impure and foolish is such a being 7

Him, the vicious one, lust infests and obeys he implicitly the command of his woman.
But he, who follows the lead of the Guru, is True and Pure.

The Lord Himself Creates men and women; it is the Sport of the Lord alone.

Says Nanak : “O Lord, all is Thy Creation and good is all that Thou createst," [2]

Pauri

Thou, my Care-free Lord, art Infinite : Immeasurable is Thy Glory.
Those who Contemplate Thee are men of Destiny, for they are Met with by the True Guru,

1. The reference is to the rivals of Guru Amar Das.
2. Lif, baseless.

3. ira (arrq) ; Shastras,

4. faany (fg) ; Vedas.

5. Ait, anoints.

2@ Guru-Granth Salih
TTT HT ee

The Word of the True Guru is the embodiment of Truth ; it is through the Word that one becomes True.
Some there are who mimic the Guru's Word, but False is all their prattle, and they, the False ones, waste

their lives away.
For, they are not from within what they seem from without, and they writhe in Pain, having sucked-in

the Poison of Maya.

Shaloka M. 4

Purifying is the Service of the True Guru : he who does it, is also Pure. ; ;
But they in whose heart abide Guile and Falsehood, those wretches the Lord drives out of His Court.
The True Devotees Serve the Guru well, while the False ones get not an opportunity howsoever they gs

SH

try.

They, who like not what the Guru preaches,

Accursed? are their Countenances ; the Lord Destroys them forsooth.

They, who Cherish not their Lord's Love, persuade them as well as you may, they, the self-willed
wretches, come not to the Path,

He who Meets with the Guru keeps his mind whole, and enjoys he immense spiritual Bliss?.

Says Nanak : “The Guru Uniting some with himself gives Peace ; but they, who beguile others, are
Separated from him (to writhe in Pain). /J/

M. 4

They, who treasure the Lord's Name, have their tasks fulfilled by the Lord,
They are dependent upon no one else, for, the Lord is ever on their side.
When the Creator-Lord is one’s Support, the whole world is on one’s side and everyone feels Blest by
his very sight.
It’s the Lord that raises men to become kings and emperors, and the one Anointed by Him all men

greet and hail.
Great ist the Glory of the Perfect Guru, for, he Serves our Great Lord, and so attains immeasurable

The Guru Blesses us too with (the Remembrance of ) the Eternal Lord and by His Grace we mount to
higher regions each day.

The slanderer, who's pate} of the Glory of the Guru, him the Lord Destroys.

Nanak, the Lord's Slave, Utters the Merits of the Creator-Lord, for, He Protects ever His Devotees. [2]

Pauri

Thou, my Compassionate, Mysterious Master, art the Greatest Giver and All-wise.

I see not Thy equal ; I Love Thee, for, Thou art so Wise and Gracious.

I'm attached to my kinsmen, but know not that they stay not.

They, who are dedicated to the one other than their Lord, are False ones ; their support is unsure.

So Contemplate thou the True One, O Nanak, for, the Ignorant fools waste away their lives in vain, [JO]

Shaloka M, 4

At first the Egocentric loves not (the Guru) ; and then he makes vain excuses,

Being of split mind, he gets Peace from nowhere.

He, in whose mind Abides not the Love of the Lord, vain and false is his comifig and going.

When the Creator-Lord is in Mercy, one Sees the True: Guru and God.

And Drinks he the Nectar of the Guru’s Word, and all his Woes and Cares and Doubts are no more.
And then he walks in Bliss and Utters ever the Praise of the Lord. [J]

M.4

He, who calls himseif a disciple of the True Guru,

Let him rise early in the morn and Contemplate the Lord’s Name. ,

Let him Attune himself to the Lord and Bathe in the Pool of Nectar at this early hour. i

Let him Dwell upon the Lord through the Guru's Word that all his Sins are washed off.

And When the sun rises, let him Sing the Guru’s Word, and Reflect on the Lord's Name, upstanding and
OWnSITtIME.

1. 380 (8%) : does mot mean good, but the reverse off it. The word has been employed in this sense elsewhere

too in the Guru-Granth.
2. gu (79) : Mit. the thing, fe., spiritual bliss,
3. ie., repair to the Society of the Saints.

PEECCECECOSHSOAEOOCSOOCOCCOCSOOCOCAOCELE OE BEHESSOSSESS SSSDSGSSOEGE

*

"
|
a
|

©)

:
s
a
y
z

Page 34
He, who Contemplates my Lord with every breath, he, the Devotee, becomes the Beloved of the oun

He, on whom is the Lord’s Mercy, him alone He Instructs in the Guru's Wisdom.
Nanak craves the Dust of the Devotee's Feet who Contemplates himself and makes others Contemplate

the Name of the Lord. [2/

Pauri

Rare are the ones who Meditate upon Thee, O True One. . ;
They, who with single-minded Devotion Contemplate Thee, O Lord, through their Blessings myriads of

others are Saved.
All thy Creation Dwells on Thee, but only those are Approved whom Thou Lovest.
They, who eat and wear well without Serving the True Guru, accursed are they in life and death.
They speak softly in Guru's Presence, but at his back they emit Poison ;
And so having False minds the Lord drives them out of His Presence. [i]

Shaloka M.4

The slanderer has worn! the lice-infected black gown,

Full of dirt and filth, and so no one sits near him.

He was sent out to slander (the Guru), but look, how the faces of him and his promoter were blackened
(at the King's Court) ! ;

Instantly, the whole world heard that the slanderer, with his servant, was shoe-beaten and he, the wretch,
hastened back to his home in utter shame.

His whole society discarded him and his wife and niece but gave him a poor shelter.

He lost this world and the next : he barks out thirsty and hungry (like a cur).

Blessed is my Creator Lord, the Purusha, who Himself did justice to the Guru,

He, who slanders the Perfect Guru, him the True Lord Destroys and lays Waste,

These are the eternal Words of the Lord who Created the whole universe. /7]

M.4

He, whose.master is hungry and naked, how will he be well-fed 7

If the master has the thing, he gives it to his servant, but if he has not a thing, what can he give him ?
If we serve a master (well) and have still to reckon for our account, that service is of no avail.

Serve ou the Lord and the Guru of Blissful Presence that no one asks thee to render thy Account,

Pauri

This is the essence of the Saints’ thinking, and the Vedas too proclaim,

That whatever the Devotees of the Lord utter, that comes to pass.

This Truth is manifest to the whole world,

That the pig-headed ones, who tussle with the Saints, get no Peace.

The Saints seek to Bless them with Merit, while they burn in the Fire of their Ego.

But what can these poor wretches do when their Lot is miserable.

They, who are accursed of the Lord, them no one owns.

They harbour enmity against one who's the enemy of no one, and so the Lord of Dharma, in his Justice,
Destroys them.

Whosoever is cursed by the Saints, their wanderings cease not.

For, whosoever shall cut at the roots, will gather no branches. [12]

Shaloka M. 4

The Guru Dweills in his Mind on the great Glory of the Lord, P. 07
The God, in His Grace, Blesses the Guru with Glory and it diminishes not howsoever anyone may try.
The True Lord and Master Keeps on the side of the Guru : in vain does the world waste itself away in
envy. :
The Lord Blackens the Countenances of the slanderers, and the Guru's Glory He increases.
The more the slanderers slander the Guru, the more his magnificence grows.
_ Nanak, therefore, Contemplates his only Lord who makes everyone to fall at his Feet. {JJ

1. The reference here is to. a Khatri, Marwaha by name, who sent his man to complain in Akbar's Court against
Guru Amar Das, the third Guru. The king dismissed the plaint.

. ny, . F 7 __ - seme .
TT EET ee ET HE Eo Ee) at oP) oy yo oa epee ae iD Guru-Granth Sahib

Page 347 

Whosoever is jealous of the True Guru, he loses the Merit of this world and the next,

He yelps and barks in vain, and dies writhing in Pain.

He tries to gather vain glory thiswise, but loses even what he has,

What, pray, shall he earn and what shall he eat in whose heart are Doubt and Pain ?

He, who is inimical to the all-loving Guru, carries on his head the Evil of the whole world,
He gets no Refuge both here and Hereafter, for, his mouth, full of slander, writhes in Pain,
If he touches gold, it turns into dust.

But if he seeks again the Refuge of the Guru, the Guru forgives his past deeds,

Nanak Dwells ever on the Lord's Name and so has he Washed off bis Sins. [2]

Pauri

Thou art the only True One, O Lord, the Command of Thy Court is over all.

They, who Worship and Serve Thee, O True One, lean on no one but Thee.

Within them is Truth and Pure are their Countenances : they utter the Truth, and lean only on Thee.
They alone are Thy Devotees who Praise Thee through the Guru's Grace, and are Blest with the

Standard of the Word.
Unto them, who Serve the True One, Nanak is a Sacrifice a myriad times. [/3/

Shaloka M. 4

They, who were cursed by the Perfect Guru from the beginning (of the Guru's House), (being un-
repentant), the curse of the Guru is even now upon them.

They seek to reunite with the Guru, but the Lord wishes not so.

They find no Refuge in the Society of the Saints, for, the Guru has so proclaimed

That whosoever goes to meet them, him the wild Fama will destroy.

Others (who) were cursed first by Guru Nanak, and the curse of Guru Angad was also upon them,

‘The third Guru (on being asked forgiveness) forgave them, knowing that in their own hands lay nothing.

And the fourth Guru too forgave all the slanderers and enemies of the Guru's House.

Even if their sons or disciples Served the Guru, the Guru fulfilled them all:

For, one gathers from the Guru what one seeks, may it be riches or sons or Union with the Lord.

The True Guru has all the Treasures with him, for, he keeps ever the Lord in his mind.

But he alone Attains to the Perfect Guru in whose Lot it is so Writ,

Nanak seeks, O Lord, the Dust of those who are Thy Friends, Thy Saints. {J]

M, 4
Whosoever the Lord Blesses with Glory, the whole world falls at his feet.

Why fear this Glory when it is the Blessing of the Lord and not of one’s own achieving. . ;
Hearken ye, O friends, my Seat is the battle-array of God's own forces : through it, He Exhibits His

Power and Humbles (the high and mighty). .
The Lord Protects His own Devotees, and Blackens the Countenances of their slanderers.
The Glory of the True Guru increases with each day : God Himself yokes the Guru to His Praise.
O Devotees of the Guru, Dwell ye on the Lord's Name, that the Creator-Lord makes the True Guru

Abide in your Mind’s home,
And know ye that the Word of the Guru alone is True, for, the Lord Himself Speaks (through the

Guru's Word).
The Lord makes Beauteous the Faces of the Guru's Devotees, and makes the whole world resound with

the Victory of the Guru.
Nanak is the Bond-slave of the Lord, for, the Lord ever Protects the Honour of His Slaves. [2]

Panri

Thou art my True King and Master:

Bless me with the True Treasure of Thy Name, O Lord, for I'm Thy Pedlar.

I seek to Serve Thee, the True One, and to Deal in Thee, and to Utter Thy Wondrous Praise. .
They, who Serve their Lord with the Devotion of a Devotee, Meet with their Lord and are Decked with

the Guru's Word.
O True King and Master, Thou art Unfathomable and Mysterious, and Thou art known only through

the Guru’s Word. /J4]

Shaloka M. 4

He, who harbours envy against another, never gathers Good,
He's followed by no one and he Wails ever in the Wilderness.

P. 308

Page 34
{ 300 ]

3
He who slanders is known as a slanderer, and all that he does is never fulfilled.
He, who back-bites others without cause, can show not his blackened face to another.
e) For, in the Kali age the body is the ficld of Karma ; in it as one sows, so one reaps,
2 The Lord's Justice is not upon mere talk : if one takes poison, one dies,
See friends, the Justness of my Lord's Regime, that one is awarded justly for what one does.
To Nanak the Truth was Revealed by the Lord, and so he speaks of the Mysteries of the Lord’s House.
{i}
M. 4
They, ba See not the living Presence of the Guru, and keep away from him, for them there is no
Refuge,
And dev, hs go aut to meet them, accursed is also their lot.
For, whomsoever the Guru carses, the whole world curses him, and his Wanderings cease not.
They, who identify themselves not with their Guru, they seek a Refuge in vain,
Their Cravings are stilled not ; and they bark out their gnawing Hungers for ever.
No one hearkens to what they utter, and they live from one fear to another,
They, whom the Guru's Glory pleases not, they find no Refuge either here or Hereafter.
They, whom the True Guru cursed, to meet them is to lose whatever Honour one has. P. 309
Being cursed by the Guru, they, who meet them, on them also is the Guru's curse.
See not their faces, who are yoked to the Other.
Whatever the Lord has Decreed, comes to pass : (for), no one can challenge the Will of the Lord,
Dwell thou on the Lord's Name, Nanak, for nothing equals the Lord's Name.
The Glory of the Lord's Name is great : and it increases with each day. [2]

M. 4

He, whom the Guru himself! establishes, his Glory is great.

At his Feet falls the whole world and with his Praise resounds the whole universe.

He, whom the Perfect Guru Blesses, is Fulfilled : him greets and hails the whole creation,
The Guru's Glory increases with each day, and no one can equal it.

He, whom the Creator-Lord Establishes Himself, Protects He him too, in His Merey, [3]

Panri

The body is the infinite Fortress ; within it are our organs, the Streets:

And the God's Devotee comes, by the Guru's Grace, here to Trade ; he gathers only the Lord's Essence.

Here the Treasure of the (Lord's) Name is expended, and one Buys up with it the Jewel? of the Lord.

They, who search for the Lord’s Riches outside their body, are the wild ignorant wretches.

They wander about in Doubt as does the deer (who having the musk within searches all over, but
not within). //5]

Shaloka M, 4

He, who slanders the Perfect Guru comes to grief while in life.

He’s cast into the deeps-of Hell ; yea, thither is he driven.

And lo, no one listens to his woes and he cries and wails in vain.

He loses the Merit of this world and the next : he loses both the Capital and the Profit thereof.

He's like the bullock of the oilman and is yoked to his labour by the Lord with the rise of each morn.
For, the Lord Sees and Hears all, and nothing from Him one can hide.

He reaps the fruit of what he had sown in the past.

But he, on whom is the Lord's Grace, he washes the Feet of the Guru,

And Swims across, by the Guru's Grace, (the Sea of Existence) as does iron, riding the wooden boat,
Contemplate thou then the Lord’s Name, Nanak, that thou attainest Eternal Peace, [J]

M. 4

Blessed is the Bride, who, by the Guru’s Grace, Meets her Lord, the King.
She’s lumined from within with the Light (of Wisdom) and Merges shen the (Lord’s) Name, [2]

Panri

This body is (the abode of ) Dharma; in it burns the Light of True One.
Within it are hid the Mysterious Jewels and Pearls, but rare is the one who mines* them.

- 1. fa o@ ag ofa fafa (fa git pe ufg fefieen) : et. whom the Guru establishes in his life-time.

2, used (Tae) —= Ha, a precious stone. .

3. dif (afin): ue a dig up. a

20 Guru-Graxt Sabi
Page 34

EES

SHH

oS,

eT een na _— a oatee

& GLOHELOOSOOEHSCOCOSE

When one Realises the All-pervading Lord, he Sees Him woven warp and woof throughout ;
And Sees he the One alone, Believes in the One alone and Hears of the One alone,
So Praise thou the Lord’s Name that thy Service is Approved by the Lord, [16] P. 319

Shaloka M. 4

He, in whose mind Abides the Lord, Tastes he the Essence of Bliss. :
His Countenance looks Beauteous at the Lord's Court, and all Creation craves to Sce his Vision,

He, who Contemplates the Name of the Fear-free (Lord), he fears no one.

But they alone Serve their Supreme Master, in whose Lot it is so Writ by God

They are Robed at the Lord’s Court, yea, they, over whom rains the Mercy of the Lord,

They are Emancipated themselves with all their kinsmen, and the whole world is Saved on their account.

O Lord, lead me on to the Sanctuary of the Saint, whose mere Sight will awaken the Life Divine in
me.

M. 4

Evergreen is the place where abides my True Guru,

They, who saw my True Guru, their Souls flowered.

Blessed are the kinsmen and father and mother to whom the Guru is born. .

Blessed, Blessed is the Guru, who’s Emancipated Contemplating the Lord’s Name, and Emancipates he

others too by His Vision,
O Lord, lead me on to my Guru in Thy Mercy that | Wash His Lotus-Feet. 2]

Pauri

Eternal is the True Guru in whose heart Abides the Lord,

The True Guru is the Hero who has stilled His Lust and Wrath and Vice,
When I See my True Guru, my mind rests in Peace,

Sacrifice a myriad times am I unto the Guru.

The God-wards win (the Battle of Life) but the self-wards win it not. [17]

EJ
A)
e)
at
€)
f)
@)
al
&)
-)
e)
&)
e]
e)
e
e)
ea
~
e
‘a
()
&)
&)
ey
=)
&)
%)
2
&
Shaloka M. 4 3
When the Lord, in His Mercy, leads the Devotee on to the True Guru, he Utters the Lord’s Name with 3
is Longue ;
And he walks in the Guru's Will ; him the Guru Blesses with the Sanctuary of the (inner) ‘Home’.
They, who treasure the Lord's Name, become fear-free :
Q
€)
;
a
6]
4)

They, whom the Lord Protects, no harm comes to them.
. Dwell thou on the Lord’s Name, Nanak, that He Emancipates thee both here and Hereafter, [1]

M. 4

The Devotees of the True Guru love to see the Glory of the Guru

The Lord Himself Protects the Honour of the Guru : so the Guru’s Glory increases with each day,

In the mind of the Guru Abides the Transcendent Lord who Saves all,

The Lord's Court is the Support of the Guru, ‘tis the Lord who Makes all to pay obsisance to the Guru,
He, who Cherishes the Guru with Devotion, all bis Sins are washed away.

His Countenance sparkles at the Lord’s Court and he gathers immense Glory.

Nanak craves the Dust of those who call on no one but the Guru. [2]

Paori

I Praise the Glory of my True Lord ;

But howsoever I Praise the True One, | know not his True Worth, ;

They, who Tasted the Essence of the True Master, were satiated. P. 311
But those, who Taste this Essence, become Mute, as the dumb person tasting sweets can say mot what's

their taste.
The True Guru Serves his only Lord and Master and so is he filled with Bliss. f 78]
Shaloka M. 4 ! J

They, who develop a carbuncle within alone know what pain is,
They, the Devotees, who are Separated from their Lord, alone know what means Separation i in Love,

Sacrifice am I unto them,
O my Lord, lead me on te my Friend, the Guru ; I'll Anoint my head with his sacred Dust.

1, ¢., brings his mind home.

Page 35
[ 302 }

The Devotee who walks in the Way of the Guru, I am like a bond-slave to him.
They, who are Imbued with the Love of the Lord, their body's robe too is Dyed in the Lord's Colour,
Be Thou Merciful, O Lord, and lead me on to my Guru that I Sell off my head to my Master. [TJ

M. 4

The body is full of Sins, how, O Saints, shall I wash it Pure ?

If | Buy up the wares of Virtue through the Guru, the Dirt of Ego within me will be washed off.
Trade thou in Truth with Love, and nothing but Truth ;

And thou Losest never and gatherest thou Profit as is the Lord's Will.

Nanak : they ajone Trade in Truth in whose Lot it isso Writ by God, [2)

Pauri

I Praise the Lord of Truth, the Purwsha, whose distinction it is that He is True,

When I Serve the True One, Truth Abides in myM.ind and the True Lord then Protects me.
They, who Contemplated the True One, they Merged in Truth.

And they, who Served not the Lord of Truth, are turned away from God ; in Ignorance they reel.
They bark out insensible' prattle, as do the drunkards. [19]

Shaloka M. 3

The Gauri Raga is blessed if through its strains one rests one’s mind on God.

And one walks in the Will of the True Guru, yea, if Decks one oneself thus.

The True Word is our True Spouse : one must enjoy it ever :

As maddar, when boiled, yields a fast red colour, so should one’s Soul reflect the Colour of the Lord.
That what is Dyed in the Lord's True Colour, blooms like the La//a flower.

And that what is false is exposed, howsoever one may coat it with gold,

False is the Praise of the False ones, for, they cherish nothing but what is False,

Nanak : the Lord alone is True (and) it is through His Grace that we are Blest. [IJ

M. 4

The Society of the Saints resounds with the Praise of the Lord : ‘tis here that the Lord is Attained,
Blessed are the Beneficent Saints who instruct others in the Ways of the Lord. ;

They impart the Lord’s Name to the others and through the Name Emancipate the whole world.

All long to see the Guru : the whole universe greets and salutes the Guru.

Thou; O Lord, Abidest in the Guru's Mind ; Thou Thyself Deckest the Guru with Glory.

O my Creator-Lord, Thou art Thy own Worshipper in the form of the Guru.

He, who tears himself away from the Guru, his face is impious and the Yama destroys him. P. 312
He gets no Refuge here or Hereafter : this the Devotees of the Guru know too well.

They, who Met with the Guru, were Emancipated, for, they Enshrined the Lord's Name in their hearts.
O ye, the Guru’s Devotees, my sons, Contemplate ye the Great Lord and be Emancipated. [2]

M. 3

Ego has led the world astray and it walks in Sin and eats the Poison of Evil.
When the True Guru is.Met, the Lord's Grace is upon us, but the Egocentrics grope in Darkness,
Says Nanak, “The Lord Unites those with Himself whom He Enables to Love the Word”, [3]

Pauri

Praise be to the Lord of Truth ; but he alone Praises the Lord who Loves Him.

They, Who Contemplate the Lord with a single mind, Time corrodes not their Souls*.

Blessed is the man whose tongue Tastes the Nectar (of the Lord’s Name).

He, who Loves his True Lord, is Approved at the Lord’s True Court. .

Blessed is the life of the True ones whose Countenances become Pure, for, they reflect on the (Lord"}
Truth. {20]

Shaloka M. 4

The Worshippers of Maya pay obeisance to the Guru, but their minds are False. -

When the Guru tries to Awaken them, they hide their heads like the tricky herons.

But the Devotees are Illumined by the Vision of the Guru ; and being True seekers®, they separate the
True ones from the False.

The False ones hide their heads in shame, for they look so odd from the rest.

They get not the (Divine) feed from the Saints : like sheep, they fall for the Filth.

1, om yar Tar) :WamA Yates ; mow this, now that.
z. a0 (eg) s lor, or body.
3, wie? (awutat) ; due es.

Page 35
If one feeds the Worshippers of Maya on Nectar, they emit out nothing but Poison,
So keep not ye company with them, for, on their heads is the Curse of the Lord.
The world is the Lord's Playfield, He Plays as He Wills : so Nanak Cherishes His Glorious Name. fi

M. 4

The True Guru, the Purwsha, is Unfathomable, for, within Him is the (Unfathomable) Lord.

Who can equal the True Guru on whose side is the Creator-Lord Himself ?

The Guru's Sword and the Coat of Mail are the Lord’s Worship, with which he overcomes the dreadful
‘dragon". of Time.

The Lord Himself is the Refuge of the Guru : He Saves all who belong to the Guru.

He, who wishes the-Guru ill, him the Creator-Lord Himself Destroys.

This is the routine of the Lord’s Court and Nanak Reveals the Mystery of the Lord, [2]

Panri

They, who Contemplate the Truc One while asleep, and Utter His Name when awake,
Rare are such beings of God, who Contemplate no one but the Truc One.

I'm a Sacrifice unto those who ever Utter nothing but the (Lord’s) Truth.

They, who Cherish the True One, mount to the Court of the True Lord,

Nanak but Utters the True Name of the True Lord who is ever-True and ever-New. [2/]

Shaloka M, 4

Whether they are asleep or awake, those turned God-wards are Approved. P. 313
They, who forsake not their Lord, even for an instant, they are the Perfect persons, Elect of the Lord,
They Attain to the True Guru by His Grace, and so Attune themselves eternally to the Lord.

If I too meet with them, I attain Honour in the Lord’s Court.

For, they Praise their Lord, awake or asleep,

Nanak : Pure are the Countenances of those who Cherish ever their Lord, [J]

M. 4

Serve thou thy Perfect Guru and Attain to the ‘Infinite’ Name.

And the Lord Saves thee upon the Sea of Material Existence ; this is the Bounty of the Lord,

Blessed is the God-awakened Merchant who Deals only in the Lord’s Name.

The Devotees gather round him like pedlars and he Embellishes them with the Emancipating Word of
the Lord.

Nanak : they alone Serve their Creator-Lord on whom is the Grace of God. /2]

Pauri

The seekers, of the Lord seek and Contemplate no one but the True One,

They, the God-wards, who Searched and Found their Lord, Found they Him, the True One, from within.
They, who Served their True Master, overwhelmed the corroding force of Time.

The True One is the Highest of the high ; they, who Serve the True One, Merge in Truth,

Blessed is the True Lord, for, the Service of the True One yields (eternal) Fruit, [22]

Shaloka M. 4
The Egocentric in Ignorance Wanders in Doubt without the Lord's Name. .
Without the Guru, his mind is held not and he is cast into the womb again and over again.

When the Lord, our King, is in Mercy, we Meet with the True Guru.
Praise thou, Nanak, the Lord's Name, that the Pain, attendant upon birth and death, ends for thee. {J

M., 4

Praise thou thy Guru in a myriad ways with Love in thy heart.

When thy mind is Imbued with the True Guru, it looks Beauteous.

Attune thy mind to thy Love and Utter ever His Praise.

Nani mind-Hungers for the Lord's Name and his mind is satiated, Tasting the Essence of the Lord,
Pauri

Through Nature, the Lord Reveals His Truth ; He it is who Created day and night.

Praise ever then thou the True One, for, True is the Glory of thy True Lord.

But, howsoever Praises Him one, one Knows not His True Worth.

(But), When Meets us the True and Perfect Guru, we See the Lord’s Presence.

They, who Praised their True Lord by the Guru's Grace, they stilled all their Hungers. [23]

1, Lf, thorn.

GuruGranth Sahib 9999909220999029990020000099999909020020990200994

Page 35
CHC

ai AS

HS

A A

rie he

§ GEGHSHOCOSOOSOESECOEE

Page 353

Shaloka M. 4

I Searched my body and mind and Found I Him, my Lord.
And, | Found the Guru, the intercessor, who United me with my Gad, [J]

M. 3

The man of riches is blind and deaf.

For, he hearkens not to the Word, his mind being filled with the noise (of riches).

The God-wards Attune themselves to the Word,

They hear the Lord's Name, Believe in the Name, and Merge‘in the Name.

The Lord Doth what He Wilileth.

And from Nanak, the Lord's Slave, the Lord calleth whichever tune He Wisheth. [2]

Pauri

O my Creator-Lord, Thou Knowest whatever is in one’s mind, P. 314

Thou, my Lord, art Infinite, but the world hath an end.

All that Thou Willest cometh to pass ; for, all that is, is Established by Thee.

Thou, the One, Pervadest all hearts ; O Thou True King, all this is Thy Play.

Buty, suey alone Meet with the Lord who Meet with the True Guru: in no otherwise! is the Lord Met.
2

Shaloka M. 4

Hold thy mind and through the Guru's Word Autune thyself to thy Lord.

Why forsake Him, pray, upstanding or downsitting, eating or breathing 7

Now that I have surrendered myself to the Lord, the anxieties of life and death have ceased.
O Lord, keep me as Thou Willest and Bless me with Thy Name, [1

M. 3

The self-ward ntric Knows not his True Home, and so wanders he in mind, back and forth.

The Lord Calls him to Himself but he hears not, then how will he be Fulfilled 7

Rare is the one who knows the True Guru’s Abode, and who attends upon him ever with joined palms.
When the Lord is in Mercy upon Nanak, He Leads him back to Himself, [2]

Panori

Fruitful is the Service which Pleases the True Guru.

Pleased is the Guru’s mind, and he destroys all our Sins.

The Instruction that the Guru imparts, that the seekers Hear,

They, who submit to the Guru's Will, their Glory increases fourfold,

Mysterious is the Way of the True Seekers ; for, they mot merely Hear the Guru's Instruction, but are
inebriated with it. {257

Shaloka M. 3

They, who identify themselves not with their Guru, they get no Peace,

They lose the Merit of this world and the next, and find no Refuge at the Lord’s Court.

Opportunity comes not to them again, that they repair to the Guru's Feet.

If the Guru keeps us out of account, our life passes in Pain.

The True Guru is the friend of all ; of Himself Unites He all with Himself if He so Wills.

Says Nanak : “He, whom the Guru enables to See the Lord's Vision, secures he his. Release at the
Lord’s Court.” [IJ

M.3

The self-willed Egocentric walks in Evil and [gnorance.

Within him is the Fire of Wrath and he loses his mind in a Gamble.
He, who practises nothing but Falsehood and Sin,

What good shall he hear and what good shall he utter ?

He is Blind and Deaf and wanders he in Wilderness, alone.

He, the Blind Egocentric,comes and goes again and over again.
Without Meeting the True Guru, he gets no Peace.

This is how he gathers what is Writ in his Lot by the Lord, [2]

Pauti

They, whose hearts are hard, they abide not with the True Guru.
In the Guru's Court prevails Truth ; there, the False ones come to Grief.

1. wag (704) : da fam 3, by no other means.

QDIDD® Gurn-Grantlt Suhib
They pass their time with the Guru by playing clever, and go back to the False ones.
With Truth, Falsehood mixes not : OQ my mind, Discriminate thou, and see,
The False ones mix with the False ones : while the True ones sit by the Guru's side. [26]

Shaloka M, 5

All the slanderers of the Guru, God Himself Destroys, P. 315
The Lord is the Eternal Support of the Saints and lo, His miracles are manifest. [7]

M. 5

They, who strayed away from the Lord from the beginning, where can they seck their Refuge 7
The All-powerful Lord Himself has Destroyed them who is the Cause of causes.

Pauri M. 5

With a noose in their hands some go out in the night to strangle others, but the Lord Knows all.
Some feed their eyes on the beauty of other men’s women, hid from the world’s eyes.

They break into homes hard to break, intoxicated with spirits.

If these be their deeds, they come to grief.
For, the Angel of Death Presses them in the Press as does the oilman the oil-seeds. [27

Shaloka M. 5

They, who are the True Lord's Servants, are Approved by the Lord :
They, who Serve the Other, are wasted away in their Ignorance. [ 1

M. 5

The Eternal Writ of the Lord no one can erase.
The True Riches are the Lord's Name : so Contemplate thou ever thy True Lord. [2]

Pauri M. 5

He, whom the Lord Pushes down', where can he plant his feet ?
e commits immense Sin and ever licks Poison.

He is wasted away slandering others, and is Consumed from within.

He whom the True Master destroys, O, who can protect him ?

Nanak seeks the Refuge of Him who is the Unfathomable Purusha, the Almighty Lord. [25]

Shaloka M, 5

In the deeps of Hell is immense Pain ; the Ungrateful Wretches are cast there,
Them the Lord destroys and they die, forsaken by the Lord, [JJ

M. 5

The slanderers are cured not of their Affliction, try as well as one may.
Them the Lord Himself deludes and Wastes them away, birth after birth, [2]

Paori-M. 5

The True Guru in His Mercy Blest me with the inexhaustible Treasure of the Lord.

And all my Cares ceased, and [ was rid of the fear of the Yama.

And all my Evil desires and Lust and Wrath were stilled on mecting the Saint,

They, who Serve anyone but the True Lord, will die frustrated?,

The Lord has Blest Nanak with the Blessing of His Name and so he is United with his Lord, [29]

Shaloka M, 4

An ascetic ought not to be greedy and, like the cursed ones he should not crave for Maya,

But here’s an ascetic? whom I invited that he accept my courtesies and he refused; later, in remorse,
he sent in (surreptitiously) his son.

The Elect of the Lord all laughed and said, “This ascetic is lured by greed.

Wherever he secs not enough, he goes not, but seeing more he forsakes his vows".

O friends, such a man is not an ascetic, but a tricky heron ; this is the considered view of all the Saints,

He slanders the Saintly being to earn applause of the world, and for this Sin, he’s Destroyed by the Lord,

See what's the fruit of slandering the Saints he has gathered : he has lost all the Merit of his penances.

Among the people he passes as an ascetic, while within he commits Sin. P. 316

oe

1. arama (TET) : AB-++ ha! —Hoe el dar
2. ge (ag)—Ge (fed a2 de vial, GoMra"), supportless.
3. A pseudo-saint of Goindwal who was jealous of Guru Amar D4&s, the third Guru, and tried his worit to

slander him. The Guru once invited him to a feast but be refused the invitation. When, however, he came to know that
some money was also to be given away by the Guru in charity, he sent in his sop. I is to this ¢pisode that this verse refers. .

Guru-Granth Sahib 9990999999999999999900000999999999099200999900902
Page 35
But the Lord has Revealed to the world his evil nature. —
The King of Dharma has asked the Couriers of the Yana to throw him in the deeps of Hell where are

burnt all the great Sinners.
No one should accost this cursed man ; for, he is cursed by the True Guru.
That what happens in the Lord's Court, that Nanak has Revealed,
But Knows only he whom the Lord has Blest. /J/

M. 4

The Devotees of the Lord Utter ever the Lord's Praise.

They Sing ever of the Lord's Glory, for, Blissful is the Name of the Lord, ;

The Lord Blesses His Devotees with the Glory of the Name, and this Glory increases with each day.
He takes His seekers to Rest in their Real Home ; this is how the Lord Protects His own Honour,
From the Slanderers He asks the Account and Punishes them He severely.

As is the slanderer’s mind, so is he rewarded,

For, that one does behind closed doors and in the desps of the earth, becomes manifest in the end.
So Nanak’s mind is in Bloom, seeing the Glory of the Lord. [2/

Pauri M. 5

The Lord Himself is the Protector of His Devotees ; waat can the wicked do to them ?
They brag in vain in their Ego, but they are destroyed with the Poison of their own minds,
Their days are numbered ; like the ripe crop they are sheared.

And as are their deeds, so are they known and rewarded,

For, the Lord of Nanak is Great, and He is the Master of all. /30]

Shaloka M. 4

The Egocentric is led astray by Greed and Ego :

He passes his days in Strife and Contemplates not the Lord,

The Creator-Lord has taken away their sense of values and all that they speak is Sinful and Vain,

Give them whatever one may, they are contented not, for, within them is immense Craving and they are
enveloped by the Darkness of [gnorance.

Nanak : it is good to break away from such self-centred wretches who are infatuated with the lust for
Maya. [J]

M. 4

They, who abide in Duality, love not the God-awakened beings.

Their Wanderings cease not, and they get not Peace even in a dream,

They utter Falsehood and practise Falsehood ; being attached to Falsehood, they remain False.

Maya and Attachment lead to Pain :one dies and lives in a Pain.
Says Nanak : “Men of split mind and those at one with God become not one, howsoever one may try.”

They, who have treasured Virtue, attain Peace through the Guru’s Word. [2]

Pauri M. 5

Thus does Nanak think, so have the sages and seers and the four Vedas (also) proclaimed ;
That whatever the Lord’s Devotees utter, it comes to pass.

This Truth is manifest to the whole world :

That the Ignorant ones, who tussle with the Saints, get no Peace.

The Saints seek to Bless them with Merit, while they burn in the Fire of their Ego.

But what can these poor wretches do when their ‘lot’ is miserable. P. 317
They, who are accursed of the Lord, them no one owns.

They harbour enmity against one who's the enemy of no one.

And so the Lord of Dharma, in his Justice, Destroys them.

Whosoever is cursed by the Saints, his Wanderings cease not.

For, whosoever shall cut at the roots will gather no branches. /31/

Shaloka M,. 5

Says Nanak, “The Guru has Enshrined the Lord's Name in thy mind, yea, the Lord, who has the power
to create and to destroy ;
O friend, Cherish ever thy Lord that thou overcomest all thy Woes”. [I]

M. 5

The hungry man cares not what dishonour and sharp talk he has to suffer to satiate his hunger,
So do I crave the Lord's Name : O Lord, be Thou Merciful and Unite me with Thyself. [2]

232590 Giuru-Granth Sahib

Page 355 
Pauri

As are one’s deeds, so does one gather the fruits thereof,

If one chews molten iron, one's throat will be burnt.

The Couriers (of Yama) then drive one on to Hell if such be one's deeds
He remains Unfulfilled ; for, he slanders others and so eats their Dirt.
Such an Ungrateful Wretch is cast into the womb again and again.

He has lost all props ; the earth itself slips from under his feet.

For, he lets not the embers of Strife die ; so he's utterly destroyed by God,
They, who indulge in Ego, they fall to the ground. [32]

Shaloka M, 3

The Lord's Wisdom is awakened in one's mind through the Guru's Word.
He who Sings the Lord's Praise, weaves the Lord in his heart.

He becomes Purest of the Pure, and of highest Wisdom.

He, who Meets his Lord, Reaches the Yonder shore.

Within him permeates the Fragrance of the Lord's Name.

He gathers Glory at the Lord's Court : his speech becomes Sublime.

He, who hears such a one is Emancipated. ;
Says. Nanak : “Meeting the True Guru, one gathers the Treasure of the (Lord’s) Name”. [J]

M. 4

One knows not what the Perfect Guru likes :

But the Guru Abides in the hearts of his Devotees.

So, he who loves his Devotees, earns the Pleasure of the Guru.

One should practise the Deeds as is the Guru’s Will, and Contemplate one’s Lord, and the Guru will
Approve of the Devotees’ Toil.

But he, who takes work from His Devotees against the Will of the True Guru,

Him the Devotees of the Guru go not near},

He, who Serves the True Guru with utter Devotion,

The Devotees of the Guru Serve him too.
But he, who comes to the Guru with Guile in his heart, near him come not the Devotees of the Guru,

Nanak utters only what is the Lord’s Will, .
That whosoever asks the Guru's Devotees to act against the Guru's Will, he suffers great Pain, [2]

Paori 4
Thou, my True Master, art the Highest of the high ; Thou alone art Thy equal.

And, he alone Meeteth Thee whom Thou Unitest with Thyself.

Him Thou Forgivest and from him there’s no taking of the Account.

He, whom Thou Unitest with Thyself, he Serveth the Guru with a single mind,

O Master, Thou art my True Lord ; my life, flesh and bones belong to Thee. ‘

Keep me in Thy Will, O True One ; I lean on no one else but Thee, O my Sublime God, [33-1] P. 318

Var of Gauri M. 5
(To be sung in the strain of the Var of Rai Kamaldi—Maujdi)

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Tulightener.

Shaloka M, 5

Approved is the coming to life of one who Dwells on the Lord’s Name.
Sacrifice am I unto the one who Contemplates the Lord of Nirvan.

For him ceases the pain of life and death and Meets he his Lord, the All-wise.
Says Nanak : “He Swims across the Sea of Existence by the Saint's Grace :
And he has the never-failing Support of the True One’. [J]

M. 5

(O Saint), enter my Home in the early morn like a welcome guest,
That I Wash thy Feet, for, I cherish thee ever, body and soul.
Then I Hear only the Lord’s Name, Gather the Name, and Attune myself to the Name.

And my Home and riches become sacred, and | Sing (only) the Praises of the Lord,
Says Nanak : “It is by great, good Fortune that one Meets with the dispenser of the Lord's Name". [2]

. . 1. The reference here is to those rivals of the Guru who tried to lure the Sikhs away from the Guru to establish,
their own authority Over (bem. -

Page 35

|

SOCOSECECCESCECECECOCEOEEC HAGE

wry Ne

Pauri

All that is in Thy Will, O Lord, is good : for, Ever-true is Thy Will.

Thou art the only One who Workest in all, and Pervadest all.

Permeatest Thou all space and the interspace : and all life is activated by Thee,
We allain to Thee in the Society of the Saints, when we submit to Thy Will.
Nanak seeks the Refuge of his only Lord unto whom He’s ever a Sacrifice. [i]
Shaloka i, §

If you have a mind, then mind your God, for, He's your Ever-true Master. ; .
Says Nanak : “Board the Boat of the Guru's Service that (you) Cross the Sea of Material Existence,” [J]

M. 5

The Egoist wears the wear of wind,

And it wears off and he too is reduced to the dust, [2]
Panri

They alone come up in the world whom the Guru Saves,

We live seeing their Pure countenances and (through them) Taste the Nectar of the Lord.
Our Lust and Wrath and Greed and Attachment are all stilled in the Society of the Saints.
The Lord in His Mercy Himself Tests (to Approve of His Saints).

Nanak : Mysterious is the Play of the Lord ; one knows not its Mystery, [2] °

Shaloka M. 5

Blessed is the day when one Cherishes one’s Lord.
But cursed is even the day of days when one forsakes one’s God. [J]

M. 5

Befriend only Him, O Nanak, in whose Hands lies everything,
He’s a bad friend who keeps not thy company even fora pace’, [2]

Pauri

Nectar-sweet is the Treasure of the Lord's Name : one must Drink it in the Socicty (of the Saints).
Contemplating the Lord’s Name, one gathers Peace and all one’s Hungers are satiated.

He who Serves the Guru and the Transcendent Lord, he Hungers no more.

And he is Fulfilled and attains Eternal Life.

© Lord, Thou art Thy only equal : I seek Thy Refuge. /3/

Shaloka ©. 5

I've seen all over : there’s no place without the Lord,
(But), they alone have found the Object of their life, who met their Guru. [J]

M. 5

Brief like the spark of lightning is our sojourn in the world, P. 319
Wholesome only is this that one Contemplates the Name of the Lord. [2]

Pauri

Read erp the Smritis and the Shastras as well as one may, one Knows not the True Worth of the
And, they alone Enjoy their Lord’s Love who join the Society of the Saints,

Our Lord is the Treasure of Jewels, who's our Creator, the Purusha, whose Name is Eternal and True,

But he alone Contemplates his Lord in whose Lot it is so Writ,
O Lord, Bless me with the Feet of Thy Eternal Name that Nanak may pass well his Guesthood in life. [4]

Shaloka M, 5

Within me is Care, though my eyes seem at Peace ; my Craving goes not.
Nanak : without the True Name, not one has shed his Care and Pain. [J

M. 5

Those (caravans) were beguiled on the Way who carried not the load of Truth.
Nanak : Blessed are they, who, Meeting their Guru, Realised their only Lord. [2]

1. figy (fiver) : a pace,

é)
i)

Panri

Wheresoever are the Saints, that place is Blessed, ;

For, they Contemplate their All-powerful Lord, and shed all their Evil.

So say both the Vedas and the Saints that the Lord is the Purifier of the Sinners.
O Lord, to protect Thy Devotees is Thy Innate Nature :

And Thou hast been so doing ever since Time began.

Nanak seeks the one Name of the Lord, whom he Cherishes body and soul. /3/

Shaloka M. 5

The sparrows chirrup, the dawn has broken, the winds are awake :
How wondrous seem the Saints at this time, inebriated with the Lord's Name! [Jj
M.5
Happiness of the home is there where Thou, O Lord, art Cherished.
For, the world-given glories are like false friends. [2]
Peori

* The Lord's Riches are the only True Wealth ; but rare is the one who knows it.
And, he alone Gathers them, whom the Lord, the Maker.of our Destiny, Blesses.
His mind and body Flower and he’s Imbued with the Love of the Lord.

He Sings the Lord’s Praise and so rids himself he of all his Woes.
Nanak : he alone Lives who Realises his only Lord.

Shaloka M. 5

How Beauteous looks the fruit of the swaliow-wort, attached to the parent tree.
Tear it off from its stem, and it breaks tnto a thousand threads. [J]

M. 5

They, who have forsaken their Lord, Die ; nay, they even cannot Die in Peace,
They, who've turned their back on God, are like a thief nailed to the Cross. {2

Panri

My Eternal Lord is the only Treasure of Peace.

He Pervades the waters and the earth and the inter-space,

For Him alike are high and low, the ant as sacred as the elephant.

Our friends and kinsmen and sons—all these are His Gifts, .

Whomsoever He Blesses, by His Grace, with His Name, he Enjoys the Love of the Lord. [7]

Shaloka M. $

He, who forsakes never his Lord, and whose mind Cherishes the Mantram of the Lord's Name.
Blessed is he, Nanak, for the Perfect Saint is he alone. [J]

M. 3

One wanders about, night and day, stung by hunger for food,
How can he be Saved from Hell, who keeps not the Prophet! in the mind. [2] FP. 320

Paori

Serve ye him, O men, who treasures the Lord's Name.

And ye shall be in Peace here, and he shall keep ye company in the Yond,

Build ye the home of Truth and Dharma with the unshakable pillars (of Faith).

And seek ye the Refuge of the Lord, who is our Support in the world of flesh as in the world of the Soul.
Nanak Cherishes the Lord's Feet, and Prostrates he before the Lord's Court. [8]

Shaloka M. 5

Thy seeker seeks Thy Blessings : Bless me, O my Loved Lord.
Thou art my Beneficent God, I Contemplate Thee at all times.
Thy Treasure is inexhaustible, unweighable and vast :

Says Nanak : “Infinite is Thy Word-which Fulfils all". [2]

M.5

Practise 7 the Word, O my loved friends, which is our Support both in life and death.
Pure and ever-Blissful are the countenances of those who Contemplate the One alone. /2]

1. Obviously, this verse is addressed to the Muslims. .

Guru-Cranth Sahib 9990992999999999999239999999999999092I92999990000"
Page 35

SAISESECECOSSGSSASESE SOO CESECHSASGEESSCEE SE SSIS SESS SSUES SOSOGESOSSOCHSSACG SERGIO

ns
Page 359

Pauri

When one is Blest with the Lord's Nectar, it brings one Peace. 7

Then one walks not on the Yama's path and dies not again.
He, who is inebriated with the Lord's Love, he alone contains His Bliss.

The Words that the Saint Utters are like the springs of Nectar. oe
Nanak, on seeing the Saint's Vision, is awake to a new Life, and Enshrines it he in his Mind, [9

Shaloka M. 5

Serve thou thy True and Perfect Guru that thy Pain is stilled,
Nanak : whosoever Contemplates the Lord's Name, he 1s for ever Fulfilled, [1/

M. 5

Contemplating whom one’s Bonds are loosed and one finds Peace and Bliss.
Nanak : Dwell thou on that Lord ever ; nay, forget not the Lord's Name even fora moment. [2]

Pauri

How shall I praise them, who've found their Lord.

Whosoever seeks the Refuge of the Saints, his Bonds are loosed.

He Sings the Praise of the Eternal Lord and is wasted not away by transmigrations.

J have met my Transcendent Lord, the Enlightener, and Knowing Him, I've entered into a Trance’,
Nanak has found the Lord who is Unfathomable and Infinite. /J0/ .

Shaloka M. 5

One does not one’s (True) Deed and wanders about aimlessly in the world.
Nanak : if one forsakes the (Lord's) Name, how can one attain Peace? [J]
M, 5

The whole world licks the bitter Poison of Maya ;

The God's Saint alane Contemplates the ambrosial Name of the Lord. /2]
Pauri

This is the sign of the Saint that seeing him one is Saved,

And the Couriers of the Fama touch one not and one dies not again.

And one Swims across the treacherous Sea of the world, ; .
And one weaves the garland of the Lord's Virtues, and all the Dirt of one's Sins is washed off.
And so, one Meets one’s Transcendent Lord, who's the Creator of man. [JJ]

Shaloka M. 5
Approved is their coming into the world who Enshrine the Lord in their minds,
The rest but pratile in vain, O friend : it avails them not.

M,4

I've Seen my Transcendent Lord who's Perfect, Infinite and Wondrous.

I've found the Treasure of the Lord's Name by the Grace of the Perfect Guru. [2] P, 321
Pauri

Guile avails not thee with thy Master : one is Wasted away by Greed and Infatuation,
They, who have been ths to Sleep by M4y4, practise Evil?.

And so-they come and go, again and over again, and are abandoned? on the Path of Yara.
Yoked to Pain, they reap what they have sown,

Nanak : when one forsakes the Lord’s Name, cursed be that day. [72]

Shaloka M. 5

Nanak : one is ever at Peace, upstanding, downsitting, awake as in sleep,
If one Praises the Lord's Name, one's body and mind are Cooled. [J
M. 5

Driven by Greed, oe goes about, and does not what is one's Destiny*,

Nanak : he, who is met by the Guru, Cherishes the Lord in his Mind, [2]
OL. mn (rar) : BHT erat,
2. a&fann (wafer) ; bad.
_ 3. ya (qa) : (Sans. er), abandoned.
4. sporeg (qureg) = at (Self) -+-rge (object), /-e., life's true abjective.

2 Guru-Granth Sahi
All other joys are Bitter ; the Lord's Name alone is Sweet.

The Saints Taste it, and find it Tasteful. '

He, in whose Lot the Lord has so Writ, Enshrines the Lord in his mind.

The One Immaculate Lord Pervades his being, and he destroys the sense of the Other. ae

Nanak prays for the Lord's Name, with joined palms, and the Lord, in His Mercy, Blesses him with it.
fias

Shaloka M. 5

Pure is that desire whose object is the One Lord alone.
Vain is all other prattle, Nanak ; without the Lord all other seeking is vain. [J]

M. 5
He, the rare one, whose mind is Pierced through with the Lord's Love, alone Knows (his Lord).
And Unites he us with the Supreme Being, and shows us the straight Path. [2]

Pauri

O my Soul, Serve thou Him who is thy Beneficent and Forgiving Lord,

That all thy Sins are washed off, Contemplating thy God.

The Saint shows us the Lord’s Path, and (so) we Contemplate the Guru’s Word.
And then seems Sour the taste of Maya and we Cherish our Lord, the God.
Contemplate thou, Nanak, thy Sublime Lord who has Blest thee with life, [14]

Shaloka M, 5

The right season* to sow the Seed of the Lord’s True Name has come :
He, who sows this Seed, reaps the Fruit thereof.

But he alone sows:it, in Whose Lot it isso Writ. [J]

M. 5
T seek nothing but the Truth ; but he alone attains it on whom is the Mercy of the Lord,
Tasting it, the mind is satiated ; but this too is the Gift of God. /2/

Pauri

They alone reap Profit in the world who Deal in the Lord’s Name.

They know not the Other, and lean only on the True One. :

They Serve their Eternal Lord, stilling all other desires.

He, who forsakes his God, vain and fruitless is his life,

He, whom the Loved Onc takes in His Embrace. Nanak is a sacrifice unto him. /J5/

Shaloka M. 5

The Lord so Willed and lo, it rained spontaneously.

And there was abundance of grain and the earth too was satiated,

The seeker Sings the Praises of the Lord, for, the Poverty and the Woes of men are past.
Such was the Eternal Writ of the Lord ; it is in His Will that we attain what.we attain.
Contemplate thou thy Lord, Nanak, who keeps thee alive by His Grace: [J]

M. 5 .
Contemplate thy One Lord alone and thou Attainest to Nirvan, thy life-object. P. 322
There’s no other place to go to ; how can one be content with the Other ?
I’ve seen the whole world through ; there’s no Peace without the Lord’s Name.
Thy body and thy treasures will become dust ; but rare is the one who realises it.
What can a man do with joy, beauty and tastes which are vain and go waste.
But he, whom the Lord Himself Deludes, he knows not the Lord's Power.
They who were Imbued with the Lord's Love, were Emancipated and Sang the Praises of the True One.
Nanak : he alone seeks the Refuge of the Lord's Door, on whom is the Grace of God. [2] .
Pauri
They die not, nor are they born (again), who are Attuned to their Lord.
They are Approved in this very life who are awake to the Praise of their God.
« They, who attained to the Society of the Saints, are the Fortunate ones.
Accursed is the life which forsakes the (Lord's) Name, it breaks like the fine thread.
Nanak : the Dust of the Saint's Feet gets us the Merit of myriads of ablutions*?. [/6]

1, Le. thy lifetime.
2. fuaral (fret) : (Sans..cgr7) : Name: of a celebrated pilgrim-station of the Hindus, at the confluence of the -

Ganga, the Yamuna and the Saraswati agar the moderg Allahabad. A hath here is considered sacred by the Hindus.

Page 36
Shaloka M. 5

He, who Loves his Lord, is like the beauteous earth carpetted with grass, shining with the pearls of dew,
Nanak : when the True Guru is in Mercy, all one’s Deeds are Fulfilled. [1] .

M.5

The vulture wanders in all directions over the seas, the woods and all kinds of vegetation,
But it descends only on the corpse, (so do the evil-doers). [2]

Pauri

Practise that Truth which Blesses us with the fruit of Bliss.

See thy Lord near, and Contemplate His Name alone. _ ‘

Be thou the Dust of all men’s feet ; and Merge thy ego in thy Lord's Being.

And injure no one, that thou goest to thy True Home with Honour. ;

And Utter thou the Name of thy Creator-Lord, the Purusha, the Purifier of the Sinners. {I7/

Shaloka Doha M. 5

I lean on my only Friend who is my All-powerful Lord. ;
lam a Sacrifice unto Him who is the Mainstay of my body and mind. [J/

M.5

-O my Love, if Thou holdest me by the Hand, I'll leave not Thy Skirt.
For, he, who forsakes his Lord, is of Evil mind and suffers the Pangs of Hell. /2]

Pauri

All treasures are the Lord’s : that what the Lord Does, alone comes to pass.

The Saints live to Contemplate Him and so Wash off their Sins,

They Enshrine the Lord's Lotus-Feet in their hearts and overcome all their Woes,

He, who Meets with the Perfect Guru, he Grieves not and cease his comings and goings.

Nanak craves immensely for the Vision of the Lord : he, on whom is the Lord’s Grace, him He Blesses
it with. fis)

Shaloka Dakhna M. 5

If one sheds one’s Doubt for a moment, and Loves one’s only Lord with Devotion.

One Sees His Presence wheresoever one goes and Sees. [J /

M. 4

He plays the game of polo, but knows not how to ride !

He wants to fly with the swans, having only the speed of acock! /2/

Pauri

He alone is Saved, O friend, who Hears and Sings his Lord's Praise,

Pure are the hands which write with Devotion the Glory of their Lord.

He gathers the Merit of bathing at the sixty-eight holies, yea, infinite are his Virtuous deeds,

He Crosses the Sea of Existence, and overwhelms he the Fortress of Evil.
Nanak : Serve thou thy Infinite Lord by holding on to whose Skirt thou art Saved, [19] P. 323

Shaloka M. 5

Engaged in fruitless tasks, we Cherish not the One Lord.

Nanak ; they, who forsake their God, cursed be their beings. [1
M.5

God, ihe Creator, lias transformed us from Ghosts into Angels.
He has Emancipated all His Devotees and Fulfilled them all.

His slanderers He has Destroyed and Declared them False in His Court.
Great is the Lord of Nanak : He Creates all and Deeks all. [2]

Pauri

Infinite is my Lord ; there is no end te His Glory ; all that happens is in His Will.
Unfathomuble, Unreachable is my Master : He is the Support of. all.

His Protecting Hand Sustains all ; He Fills all and Fulfils all.

He is my Beneficent and Forgiving Lord ; he, who Contemplates Him, the True One, is Saved.
Whatsoever Pleases Thee, O Lord, that alone is good : Nanak sesks Th, Refuge. [20]

3 1. ged (aa) . without (3) profit (37),

ee ee ee

2@ Guru-Granth Sahib

Page 36
FETED TT AT et a eT et eT eT eT ET PT eT TT TT eT TT TT ET eT TT TTT TTP TT eT eT

Shaloka M. 5

They, who belong to the Lord, Hunger no more :
Nanak : he, who repairs to the Lord’s Feet, 1s Saved. [J]

M. 5

The Seeker seeks but the Lord's Name, and the Lord Blesses him with it.
Thy Lord is thy host?, O Nanak, for, he asks not (but gives He), /2/

Pauri

To be Imbued with one's Lord—this is one’s true fare and wear.

To be Attuned to God's Love—this, indeed, is to possess clephants and horses.

One may rule over kingdoms and enjoy immense joys, but one should turn not one’s back upon God,
The Lord's Seeker seeks Benediction at the Lord's Gate, yea, he leaves not the Lord's Door.

Nanak craves ever for the Vision of his Lord, and in the Joy of his Search liveth he. [2/-7]

Rag Gauri
The Hymns of Bhaktas

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the ternal, the All-pervading,
the Greater, the Jlurushw, the Hnlightener.

Gauri Guareri, Chaupadis of Kabirji

I was Afire but I found the Water of the Lord ;

And the Lord’s Water Saved my burning Soul, {/-Pause]

To still the Craving of our mind we go out to the woods :

But we get not thither the Water to quench (the fire of Desire) without the Lord. [7]
This Fire has burnt down both angels and men :

Only the Water of the Lord Saves them from being consumed. [2]

The (tempestuous) Sea of Existence becomes then the Sea of Bliss and Peace,

‘And the more one parlakes of it, the more it increases. [3]

Says Kabir : ‘Dwell thou on thy Lord, the Support of the earth,

For, the Water of the Lord has quenched my Thirst." {4—/]

Gauri Kabirji

O Lord, my Thirst for the Water (of Thy Name) goes not.

And, the more I partake of it, the more Iam Athirst®. /J-Pause}

Thou art the Treasure of Water ; I am thy fish,

And I so abide in Thee : for without Thee I can live not. [7]

Thou art my cage, I am the parrot sheltered within,

Then, how can the Yarma’s cat harm me, Thy own? [2]

Thou art the tree, [ am the bird perched on it,

How unfortunate am I that I see thee not! [3]

Thou art my True Guru ; I am a fresh convert to Thy Faith.

Says Kabir : ““O Lord, Meet me, for this (human birth) is my last opportunity (to See Thee)”. [4-2]
P. 324

Gauri Kabirji
If I have realised that there is but One Lord alone,
Why does the world feel aggrieved and bemoan? [J]
Tam without honour (they say) ; I've lost my station in life :
(If so), then why should the people worry about me, and be on my track? /J-Pause]
I may be bad ; bad of mind too,
But I share my honour-dishonour with no one else. [2]
T care not whether the world glorifies or reviles me,
But all will know when (in the Lord's Court) the Evil-doers will be exposed. [3]
Says Kabir : “‘Honour is that which the Lord Approves,
So forsake thou all (other values) and Contemplate thy Lerd’. [4-3]

1. Was (WaT) is the householder who arranges a Yafha and makes offerings to the performing Brahmins to
atone for his sins, Here, the Lord is called a Yajmana or the host who makes offerings to his Devotees, instead of
receiving them like the priest.

2. Zit. afire.

Guru-Granth Gabib 999999292999999999999999999999999 9998229 999990 I*

PAM IOERECOGIGOSLESE GOOCACCOCEECECACEGOL CPOE PSOSOSPECCEOSOKOHSSSOHOCEGOSESOOOGOBCOBORH

Page 36
Gaori Kabirji

If one may attain Yoga by roaming about naked,

Then the deer in the woods would all be Emancipated ! fi

What use is it, if one lives naked or dressed in skin, ;

So long as one Contemplates not the All-pervading Lord? [J-Pause]

He who says by close-cropping the hair one becomes a Siddha,

(Knows not he) that were it so, the sheep would all have found Deliverance ? {2]
© friend, if one were to be Saved by celibacy,

Then why didn't the cunuchs attain the highest state of Bliss? [3/

Says Kabir : “Hear ye, O my human friends,

Without the Lord’s Name, one finds not Deliverance’. [4-4

Gauri Kabirji

They, who bathe morning and evening (to wash off their sins),
Are like the frogs living in waters’, [J

If they are Imbued not with the Lord,

They are all presented to the King of Dharma (to answer for their deeds). {J—Pause]
They, who are in love with their bodies, change many colours.

For, they have no Compassion in their ‘hearts even in dream. [2]

The wise ones say religion has four feet',

But the Saints are concerned with their Peace, in the midst of confusion. [3/

Says Kabir : “‘Why should we involve our mind in too many things ?

Why not forsake the detail, and Drink-in only the Essence’. {4-5}

Gauri Kabirji

Of what avail to him are meditation, penances, fasts and worship,
In whose mind Dwells not the Lord, but the Other, /J/
O friend, Attune thyself to the One Lord alone,
For through cleverness thy All-powerful Lord is Attained not. /1-Pause/
Forsake thy Greed and the ways of the world,

' And eradicate from thy mind thy Wrath, Lust and Selfhood. PJ
They, who practise the way of works, are bound down by Ego
And such men forsure can serve no one better than the Mole o of stones, [3]
Says Kabir : ‘‘The Lord is Attained only through Love-worship of the Lord,
For, the Lord is met through innocence of the heart”. [4-6]

Gauri Kabirji

In the womb of the mother, no one knows one’s caste,

It is from the Lord's Seed that the whole Creation came into being. [{J/

Say, O Pundit, how did you become a Brahmin-born ?

Do not lose the Merit of thy human birth by calling thyself a high caste. {/=-Pause]
If thou art a Brahmin being born of a Brahmin mother,

Then why didn't you choose to be born in somewise different than the others ? [2]
How are you a Brahmin and J a low-caste ?

Is it that I have blood in my veins and you have milk? [37

Says Kabir : “He alone who Contemplates his Lord,

Is renowned a Brahmin among the men of God". [4-7]

Gauri Kabirji

How can one sleep in Peace, enveloped by Ignorance ? P. 325
For, (led by Ignorance) both the poor and the rich come to Grief. [7]

So long as the tongue utters not the Lord’s Name,

One comes and goes and grieves one ever. [/-Pause]

As with the (ever-changing) shade of the tree,

So it is with Maya ; it goes not along with one when life passes. [2]

As is (the tune) merged in the singer, so is my life (Merged in the Lord) :

But how can the Dead ones know the mystery (of God)? [3]

1. Truth, Austerity, Compassion and Charity. Vishnu Purana enumerates the following : Truth, Yoga, Worship
and Meditation,
wo

Page 36
As do the swans over a tank, so does death hover over our heads : __
So, Drink thou, O Kabir, the Lord's Nectar of Immortality, [4-8]

Gauri Kabirji

The Lord's Light manifests itself in His Creation ; the Creation flowers in the mind.
The mind yields two fruits—pearls and glass, true and false. [J]

Of what kind is that mind which becomes fear-free 7

When one is afraid of nothing, and becomes fearless he. [/-Pause]

The mind is held not by roaming the pilgrim-stations,

Or, by involving oneself with the worldly codes of conduct. [2]

‘Sin’ and ‘virtue’ are both alike (when viewed from God's angle)’,

So hold fast to God, the Philosopher's Stone within, and shed thy virtuosity. [3]
Says Kabir : ‘‘Be not estranged from thy Lord who's above the three Modes,

And, acquaint thyself to thy Lord and abide in Him alone”. [4-9]

Gauri Eabirji

(Some pretend) that they have known the Infinite Lord who is beyond thought,
And so by mere talk they proclaim to have reached the Lord’s High Heaven. [J]
They know not where the Lord abides,

Though say they all, “We'll go, we'll go (to the Lord’s abode)", [J-Pausé]

By mere talk, one's mind is satiated not,

For, the mind is satiated when it's rid of Ego. [2]

So long as one (Serves one’s Lord) in the hope of entering the Lord’s Heaven,

So long one abides not at the Lord’s Feet. [3]

Says Kabir : “To whom shall | say this, O men,

That the Society of the Saints itself is the Lord’s Heaven” ? [4-J0)

Gauri Kabirji

A man is born, he grows and then he dies.

Before our. very eyes, the whole world is being dissolved. [JJ

Aren't you ashamed of saying ‘‘This house is mine”, :

When nothing goes along with thee, and nothing remains thine inthe end? [J-Pause]
One builds one’s body with great care,

And yet it is burnt in fire when it dies. {2]

Each day, one applies Chandan-scent to one’s limbs,

And yet one's body is burnt along with the firewood in the end. [3]

Says Kabir : “Hear ye me, O wise ones,

Your beauty will pass away and the whole world will see”. [4-11]

Gauri Kabirji

Why should I grieve over the dying of others :

I should grieve if 1 myself were to remain alive (for ever). [J]

But, I shall die not as the world dies,

For, I have now Met my Life-giving Lord. [J-Pause]

One applies scent to make one’s body fragrant,

But forsakes he thereby the Giver of the highest Bliss. [2]

There is but one well (of the body) ; the five (sense-organs) draw water from it,

But even when the string (of life) breaks, they, in their ignorance, want to draw sustenance fromit! [3]
Says Kabir: “Now that my mind is awake (to the Highest Truth),

Neither am I the same old well, nor are the drawers of water the same”. [4-12]

Gauri Kabirji
Life in all its ramifications as trees, animals, worms, and insects,
Manifests itself in various forms and kinds in serveral births. [J] : P, 326

I lived through many such lives*

Before ] was cast into my mother’s womb, {1-Pause]

I became a Yogi, an ascetic, and a man of chastity and pious conduct,
And became I a king, seated beneath a canopy, and a beggar too. [2]

i. That is, the virtues performed and sins avoided for some reward, worldly or other-worldiy. |
2. ir, homes.

Gurv-Branth Salpb 99 CRE CRE CROMER ohn

Page 36
The men of the world die while the Saints live an eternal life.

For, their tongue Tastes the Nectar of Immortality, {3/

Says Kabir: “Be Merciful ta me, O Lord, ;

I Surrender myself to Thee : now Bless me with Thy Perfect Wisdom”, [4-J3]

Gauri Kabirji, along with M, 5

So strange are the ways of the world, O Kabir,

That in the place of the curds, one churns water. {J Pause]

Each morn, the ass grazes the green shoots (of Evil):

Each morn he rises only to laugh and bray himself to death. [7]

This he-buffalow is intoxicated (with Ego) and is disciplined by nothing :

He tries to overwhelm others and $0 falls in Hell. /2/

Says Kabir :““The strange play of the world has become manifest to me,

That the sheep (of mind) sucks the milk (of wisdom) from its he-offspring’, [3]
Contemplating the Lord's.Name, my mind has been Illumined:

Yea, the Guru hath awakened me to the Higher Truth”. [4-/-I4]

Gauri Kabirji, Panchpada

As ine fish leaves water, and dies,

So I was devoid of Contemplation of the Lord in my previous births, J]

Say now, O Lord, what shall be my state,

When I have forsaken the holy city of Banaras due to lack of wisdom! /{J-Pause]
I wasted almost my whole life in the town of Shiva,

And lo, at the time of death, I came over to (the cursed city) of Maghara*! [2]
I did penance at Kashi for many, many years,

And when it came to dying, Tran to here! /3]

T look upon Kashi and Maghara alike :

But they, whose worship is false, O how shall they Swim across ? [4]

Say thou, O Shiva, say O Gur-gaja’, know ye not,

That Kabir will die (and be Saved) uttering the Name of the Lord? /5-/5]

Gauri Kabirji

The body to which one applies scents of all kinds,

Is burnt inthe end along with firewood. [i]

How can then one be proud of one's body or riches

Which remain buried in the dust and go not along with one in the Yond? /J—Pause]
One sleeps by night and works by day.

But ulters not tne Name of the Lord even fora moment! /2]

In the mouth one chews the betel-leaf ; in the hand one holds the string (of a kite)*;
But when one dies, one is bound down like a thief, [37

One must Utter the Lord’s Praise with Devotion as Instructed by the Guru,

And so Uttering, find eternal Peace and Bliss. [4]

He, on whom is the Lord’s Grace, Enshrines the Lord’s Name in his heart :

And, the Fragrance of ihe Lord Permeates his whole being, [3]

Says Kabir :“O Ignorant mind, Contemplate thy Lord :

For, the Lord alone is True ; the rest is all false strife’. /6-J6]

Gauri Kabirji, Tipadas and Chartukas

I see not the Yama any more: I Sce oniy my Lord, the Gad,

I am rid of my Woes and abide [ ever in Peace.

My enemies have turned into friends,

And, the evil-doers* have become (for me) pious in the heart. {Jj
Now I find Bliss and Peace all over, .

And, as I know my Lord, I know what Peace js.  {J-Pause]

1. ie. its own intellect,

2. The whole hymn ridicules rhe ancient Hindu belief that by dying at Banaras one gocs to heaven, and by dying
at Maghara, to hell,

3. Shiva is reputedly the founder of the city of Banaras and Gur-gaja of Maghara.
4. fe. wastes away one's time in vain pursuils.
5. Zt. worshippers of (dark) power, who practised many evil deeds in the name of religion.

Dh By Guru-Granth Sabib

Page 36
Myriads of Afflictions that infested my body P, 327
Have turned into the Bliss that comes from the Trance of Equipoise.

He, who knows his Self, Sees the Lord Pervading all,

Him no Affliction touches ; nor the three Maladies!, [2]

My mind has become what it was in its original purity :

But, I knew only when I Died to my self.

Says Kabir : “This, indeed, is the way to Merge in Bliss,

That one is neither himself afraid, nor makes others $0." {3-J7]

Gauri Kabirji

When the body dies, where doth the soul rest ?

Tt is released from the grip (of the three Modes), and Merges in the Unstrock Melody of the Word,
He, who Knows his Lord, alone Realises Him,

And Enjoys he Him, (speechless) like the dumb eating the sweets. [J]

Such is the Wisdom that the Lord has imparted to me.

So, hold thy breath in Sushmana® (that thou hearest the Unstruck Melody). /J/-Pause]
And seek out a Guru that thou seekest not another again,

And Dwell on that State beyond which thou may'nst have to go.

Contemplate thou in such a way that thou contemplatest not again,

And Die in such a way that thou diest not again to die. /2/

Turn the tide of thy breath-waves ; ,

And bathe at their confluence in thy Mind-at-peace’,

And have this thy way that thou lookest on all, alike,

And Reflect on the Quintessence of Reality ; nay, reflect not on another thought. /3]
Be on the side of God, and adopt the ways of water, fire, air, earth and the sky*.

Says Kabir : “ Contemplate thy Immaculate Lord,

And arrive at thy Home that thou comest not out again.” /4-/8/

Gauri Kabirji, Tipadas

The Lord is too precious to be bought for gold,

So [ gave my mind away (to Him) and attaied unto Him. [J]

Now the Lord owns me as His very own,

And all-too-spontaneously, my mind is Pleased with Him. [J-Pause]

Brahma dilated upon Him but found not His end,

But, through His Love-worship, the Lord came to my Home of His own. [2]
Says Kabir : “Now that 1 have calmed my mercurial mind,

In my Lot is now the Worship of my Lord alone”. [3-J-]9/

Gauri Kabirji

Death which has put terror in the hearts of all,

The reality of that death has been Revealed to me, through the Guru’s Word, [i]
Now why shall I dic, when I have already Died to my self? .

For, they alone die again and again, who know not the Lord (of Life). {i-Pause]
Everyone says, he Dies, he Dies, (to his self),

But, he alone becomes Deathless who Dies in Poise. [2]

Says Kabir : “In my Mind is immense Bliss,

For, I’m rid of my Doubt and only the Lord of Bliss remains within me", [3-20]

Gauri Kabirji

I know not where the Soul aches ; where shall I apply the Balm ?
I've searched my body through : I find not where my Soul aches. [J]

1. i¢. mrfq (mental afflictions) ; fempfg (bodily afflictions) and Gwfa (afflictions bora of doubts or delusions).

2. [tis the Yogic belief that he who holds his breath in the Sushmana (spinal) cord, hears the celestial, unstruck
melody (nindz Haz).

3, Lit, turn the tide of the Ganga and Yamuna (that is the breath-waves passing through right and left nostrils),

and bathe at their confluence (Sushmana) in the mind.
4, ie. the cleansing and cooling quality of water, the purifying and warming quality of fire, patience of the earth,

the all-loving nature of ajr, and the all-pervasiveness of the aky.
s
Gurv-Granth Sabib 999999999999 999999999I999999999999999999 999909909

PAESEOCCECCSSSSE BOSC OSOSOHSOHEHEOEEE SECT CE PESOS OEOSECECOOSCSLESSSCEBOEEEESGE

Page 36
{ 318 ]

He who Loves, alone knows the Pangs (of Love).

The Lord's Devotees know alone how pointed are the shafts of the Lord's Love. [J-Pause]
Look upon all His Devotees! with a like eye,

For, who knows who of these thy God Loves? [2]

Says Kabir : “He, in whose Lot it is so Writ,

Him the Lord Meets, forsaking all others”. [3-2] ]

Gauri Kabirji:

He, who has the One Lord as his Master, P. 328
At his door knock myriads of salvations. [J

If one says, “O Lord, I lean only on Thee",

Then one's obligation is to no one else. //-Pause]

He, who carries the burden of the three worlds,

Why will He not Support thee too? 2] -

Says Kabir : “I have given thought (to the problem of evil in the world),

But, what can one do if a mother poisons her own child?" ? /3-22/

Gauri Kabirji

How can a woman become a true bride by burning herself on the pyre of her spouse without Truth in
er heart

Give this, O Pundit, thy deepest thought. [J]

Without love, how can a person be attached to another ?

So long as one is lured by Desire, one can love not, {/-Pause]

So long as one looks upon Maya? as true,

One Meets not one’s Lord even in dream. [2/

Says Kabir : “She who surrenders her mind and body and riches and home to her Lord and Master,
She alone is the True Bride”. [3-23/

Gauri Kabirji

The whole world is drugged with the poison (of Maya) :

Yea, (in the Sea of) Poison, the whole world has been Drowned, [J]

O man, why are you bent upon wrecking your boat in shallow waters:

Why have you broken away from the Lord and attached yourself to Maya? [J-Pause]
Even angelic men have been burnt by the Fire of Maya,

The Lord’s Waters are near at hand, but Man quenches not his Fire, the fool. [2]
Contemplating thy Lord, the Lord's Waters well up in thee :

And of those Immaculate Waters, Kabir now recites the Praise. [3-24]

Gauri Kabirji_

Why was not that mother widowed

Whose son Dwelt not on the Wisdom of the Lord? /J]

Why did not that Sinner die as soon as he was born,

Who did not Contemplate his Lord, the God? //-Pause/

Many were the children still-born ; why did he come out alive,

That he lives like a Leper® in the world of Life. [2/

Says Kabir : “However much beauteous is the man,

Without the Lord’s Name, he looks deformed, like a hunch-back". 3-25]

Gauri Kabirji

He, who Recites ever the Lord’s Name,

Unto him, I am a Sacrifice a myriad times, [7] -

Pure is he, for, he Sings the Pure Praise of his Immaculate Lord :
He’s my fellowman ; his sight pleases me. /J-Pause]

He, whose heart is filled by Lord, the God,

Of his Lotus-feet I am but «s Dust. /2]

1. Lit. brides,
2. i.e. if the Lord Himself deludes a human being,
3. profs (ergfr)=nrofs : the Quer the Lord's woman, i¢., Miya,

4. a@fs (wats) =a.
5. Lit, of amputated arms,

Page 367 
I'm a weaver by caste, (but) patient in mind,
And so ] Utter the Lord's Praise in a state of utter Poise. /3-26/
Gauri Kabirji
From the sky! (of my mind), oozes the sweet Nectar as out of a furnace.
I've gathered the great Essence and hardened my body like a log*, [1]
He alone is intoxicated with (the wine of) Equipoise,
Who Drinks in the Essence of the Lord's Wisdom. [J—Pause]
Equipoise is the bar-woman who serves the Wine,
And, I pass my days enraptured by Bliss. /2/
“Knowing His Essence, I Attuned myself to my Immaculate Lord,”
“And then,” says Kabir, “‘my Intuition was awakened, and [ was Wise in God”. [3-27]
Gauri Kabirji
The habit-of the mind is that it pursues itself,
If, therefore, one kills one’s mind, how will he become an adept? [J]
Who, pray, is the seer who slays his mind ?
For, if he slays his mind, what is it that he is out to Emancipate 7? [J—Pawse /
It is through the mind that the Life-force speaks,
gan ke without destroying (the evil of) one's mind, one cannot Worship one’s Lord, /2/
abir : “He, who can resolve this mystery (of the mind),
Finds the Mind as the God of the three worlds". [3-28]
Gauri Kabirji

P, 329

The stars that one sees in the sky,

Who is it that has planted them on high? [J]

Say, O Pundit, who is it that Supports the starry sky ?

It is the fortunate seer who knows the Truth. {J-Pause/]

The sun and the moon blaze with splendour.

But ‘tis the Lord who Permeates all. [2/

Says Kabir : “He alone will know it all,

In whose heart is the Lord, upon whose tongue is God". [3-29]
Gauri Kabirji

Smiritl, the offshoot of the Vedas,
Has forged new chains®, new bonds. [J]
She has bound down her own city-mates®,
With the bonds of Attachment, and aimed at them the shafts of Death.’ {/-Pause]
These bonds are loosed not, nor ate they snapped :
Like the serpent, she bites the whole world to death. {2}
* Within my sight, the whole world was beguiled.
“But I was Saved,” says Kabir, “by Uttering the Lord’s Name”. /[3-30/
Gauri Kabirji

J have applied reins (to the turbulent horse of my mind),
And mounting the saddle (of desires) I roam all the skies, [/)
Now I ride through as and where [ like to ride,
As my feet are held in the stirrup of Equipoise. { i-Pause/
Come, my mind, let me take you to the Lord’s Heaven :
And, if you wait and tarry, I'll whip you with (the Lord's) Love. [2]
O good rider, my mind, Kabir asks thee
To ar oe the textual knowledge of the Vedas and the Semitic Books (and Realise their Essence).
FJ
Gauri Kabirji
The mouth that tastes the five life-giving nectars’,
That mouth I have seen being burnt in fire. [J]

1. Le. the tenth door,

2 like ars (wood).

3. That the evil of the mind is to be destroyed and yet th the mind isto be kept whole and ot destroyed through °
self-torture or penances.

4. Lit, daughter.

3. Ales. (ate) =a.

6. Le. devorees.

7. fe, milk, curds, butter, sugar and boney.

Page 368 
O my Lord, my King, rid me of this one Affliction

That | am burnt not by fire, nor cast into the womb (agein). { i-Pause ]
The body (after death) is wasted away in a myriad ways,

And while some burn it, the others bury it in the dust. [2/

Says Kabir : “O Lord, let me but have the Vision of Thy Lotus Feet,
Even-if after that Thou send the Yara to drive ne into the Yond". [3-32]

Gauri Babirji

‘The Lord Himself is the fire, He Himself is the air :

If He wants to destroy one, who can save him? [Jj

How can the one who Contemplates the Lord be consumed by fire :

Yea, he, whose mind is permeated through by Lord, the God? [/-—Pause]
Who is burnt, who loses, pray 7

It is only the Lord, the Player, who lays His Play. [2]

Says Kabir : “Utter the two letters? (of Ram),

For, if He is thy Master, He will keep thee whole”. [3-33]

Gauri Eabirji, Dupadas

[ have set not my mind on Contemplation or the Yoga:

But without Dispassion, how can the bonds of Miya be loosed ? Li]

Of what worth our life be, P, 330
If the Lord's Name is not our Mainstay ? [1-Pause]

Search one may all the skies, (all the worlds),

But, one finds not another like one’s Lord, [2-34]

Gaui Kabirji

The head that one decks with a turban,

That head, when it falls, the crows peck at to sharpen their beaks, [J]

Why should then one be proud of one’s body or riches,

And Enshrine not the Lord’s Name in the mind? //—Pawre]

Says Kabir : “Hear thou, O my mind,

Such will be thy state too (if thou Dwellest not on the Lord’s Name)". [2-35]

Rag Gauri Guareri : Ashtapadis of Kabir

One secks pleasures and gathers pain.

Why should then I seek a pleasure which isvain? [J]

Man is attached to the Poison (of Maya) and yet hopes to attain Peace !-
How can such a one abide in one’s Lord, the King? /J-Pause]

Even Shiva and Brahma are afraid of such a pleasure,

But I have taken to it as the living truth. /2/

Brahma’s son, and Narada, the seer, and the Sheshnaga

Did not. know that there was a Soul too within the body. /3/

Search ye this Soul, O men,

And find out where this Soul goes when the body perishes 7 [4]

Through the Guru's Grace, Namdeva and Jaideva too

Knew the Soul's mystery, through the Lord's loving Adoration. [3]

This Soul neither comes nor

Whosoever has shed his Doubt, knows the Truth. /6]

This Soul has neither form, nor sign :

From the Lord’s Will it comes ; and Merges it too in the Lord's Will. {7/
If one knows the mystery of this Soul

(Knows he too that) this Soul then Merges in the Lord, the Ocean of Peace.. [8]
One Life runs through all the bodies and forms,

And this Life, this Soul, Kabir Dwells upon, {9-I-36]

1. In Hindi and Panjabi, the word Ram (ay) has two letters, the sound of a being not taken into account.
2. Lit. mind,

pd a ed aa eed aed ed od SF ed ad =

290 @iuru-Granth Subib

Page 36
Gauri Gaureri

They, who were Awake only to the Lord's Name, night and day,

Recame adepts, for, they were Attuned to the Lord. [J-Pause]

The Seekers, the Siddhas and the Seers all lost the game : .

But they, who Dwell on the one Name (of the Lord), were Fulfilled by this Elysian Tree. [J]
They, who Dwell on the Lord, remain not different from the Lord.

Says Kabir: ‘Know ye the Essence of the Lord's Name". [2-37]

Gauri and Sorath

© shameless one, have you lost all sense of shame ?

Else, why you leave your Master and go to another? [J-Pause]
He, whose Master is the Highest of the high,

For him it seems not good to go to another's home, [J]

He, our Lord, Pervades all, Fills all,

And keeps ever our Company : yea, He isnot far, [2]

He, of whose Feet Maya too secks the Refuge :

Say, O man, what has that Lord not in His Home? [3]

He, of whom everyone speaks, is All-powerful,

And of Himself His Own Master and the Beneficent One. [4]
Says Kabir : “Perfection is achieved by him alone in the world, P. 331
Who Enshrines no one but his God in the mind, /5-38/

Whose son is one and of whom is ome the tather
Who dies, pray, who can give pain to another? [IJ
It is the Lord alone, the Enticer, who has enticed the whole world.
Separated froti "Him, how can I live ? {1-Pause]

Who can be.gafled a man, who a woman ?

It is, all the’play of (five) elements which constitute our frame. [2]
Says Kabir : “Now that | am Pleased with my Enticer,

The Delusion has left me, (for), 1 know the Deceiver”. [3-39]

My Lord, the King, has come to my Rescue :

He has Snapped the Bonds of life and death and Blest me with Supreme Bliss, /{-Pause]

He has led me to the Society of the Saints,

And rid me of the clutches of the ‘five Demons’.

Now my tongue Utters nothing bit the Nectar-Name of the Lord :

And, lo, without a price, the Lord has made me His Slave. [J/ tor
The True Guru has been merciful to me : ‘
He has pulled me out of the (treacherous) Sea of Existence.

Now I am Attuned to the Lotus-feet of the Lord,

And the Lord Abides for ever in my Mind. /2/

The Fire of Maya has been quenched,

And my Mind is Content, and I lean on the Lord’s Name.

The Lord now seems Pervading all the earth and the waters,

And, wherever I See, | See no one but the Inner-knower of our hearts. /3]

His Worship He Himself Enshrines in our minds :

And Meets He us, for, such is the Lord’s Eternal Writ,

He, on whom is the Lord's Grace, is Fulfilled :

For, the Lord of Kabir is Beneficent to the poor. /4-40)

Contaminated! is water, contaminated is the earth, yea, the whole creation is contaminated.

Our birth is contaminated, as is our death, yea, the whole world is infected by contamination, [J]
O Pundit, tell me then, who at all is Pure ?

And, dwell on such a Wisdom, O friend, which Reveals the Pure One to thee. [J-Pause]

Aren't our eyés contaminated ‘and our tongue too ?

Aren't the ears contaminated ? For, contamination is everywhere.

And we are contaminated in whatever we do and so our kitchen too is contaminated, [2]

Many know how to be ensnared but rarely how to be Released.

Says Kabir : “He, who Contemplates the Lord in the heart, is contaminated not. [3-41]

' 1. This hymn isin refutation of the popular Hindu belief that on one’s birth and death, one's kindreds are
contaminated. Cf Var of Asa J, Pauri 18, etc.

®

Page 370 
Resolve this conflict in my mind, O Lord,

If Thou hast anything ta do with me, Thy Servant: /J-Pause]
Is the mind greater, or the Lord to whom it is Attuned ?

Is the Lord greater or through what He is Realised ? [2/

Is Brahma greater or the One who Created him ?

Is the Veda greater or the One from whom it issued forth? [2

Says Kabir : “I have become sad and desolate at heart, 3
(Knowing not whether) a pilgrim-station is more sacred or the Devotee of the Lord.” [3-42]

Rig Gauri Cheti

See, O friend, Wisdom’s storm has~burst :

And it sweeps away the thatched huts of Doubt, propped by Maya. //-Pause/]

The two pillars of the double-minded one have fallen, and the roofing of Attachment has -crashed.

The tenement of Desire has ,been blown away and the pitcher of the false mind has broken. [7] P.332
As is the welcome rain after the storm, O Lord, so is Thy Servant now Imbued with Thy Grace.

Says Kabir : ‘My mind is Hlumined, when I see the Sun (of Wisdom) break upon me”, [2-43]

Gauri Cheti
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Enlightener.

They, who hear not'the Lord’s Praise, nor Sing it,
And, by mere talk want to bring the skies down; [J]
What shall one say of such beings ?
They, who are devoid of the Lord's Worship, they make me afraid. [I-Pause]
They themselves can offer not even a handful of bounty to another,
But slander those whose munificence is like the Ganges.
Downsitting and upstanding, they tread the way of Evil,
They waste themselves away and beguile the others too. [3]
Without vain discursiveness they know not a thing,
And even if the wise Brahma tells them, they believe him not. {4]
They are lost to themselves ; the others too lose through them ;
For, they set the Temple on fire within which they sleep. [5]

i They laugh at others, themselves being half-seeing :
Kabir is filled with shame, seeing such beings. /6-/-44/

Rag Gauri Bairagan, Kabirji
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Eternal, the Hulightener.

In their life-time the elders aren't cared for : after death people make offerings in their name !

(But), even these offerings the dead souls do not get, for, they are fed to the crows and the dogs. [J]
O men, show me the Path to Real Bliss, .

For, everyone craves for Bliss, knowing not how to attain it? [J-Pause]

One shapes idols out of dust and makes offerings to them of human life :

Such are the souls of the dead ancestors too, who cannot ask for what they crave. [2]

One kills the living life to propitiate the dead ones, and so one is making one’s own death miserable.
Knowing not the Merit of the Lord's Name, the world is Drowned in the Sea of Fear. [3/

They, who waver in their Faith and know not their Lord, worship the gods and goddesses of stone :
They Contemplate not their Lord, the God’, and lick the Poison (of Maya). [4-I-43]

Gauri

He, whe Dies to his self and so Dying, Lives, and Merges thus in the Void (of the waveless Mind),
And abiding in the world of senses, rises above it, he is cast not upon the Sea of Existence again. [JJ
© Lord, lead me on so to churn Thy Curds,

That in the light of the (Guru's Wisdom), | stay my mind ; and so suck-in Thy Nectar. {/-Pause]

1. mag (ope) : 4. 1 (without) ge (caste).

Page 371 
The Guru's Word has pierced through the hard core’ (of my Mind) and a state of Illumination has

dawned upon me.
And my mistaking the rope feats snake) due to the darkness of Maya is ended, and | abide in the Eternal

Home of the Lord,
Maya's bow aims at the fo even without a shaft, and lo, the whole world is struck, P, 333
But howsoever the winds waft my paper-kite (of hfe), | keep myself attached to the string (of the Lord),

My Mind now abides in ithe Blissful Heaven of Desirelessness, and the evil of two-mindedness has

hastened away.
Says Kabir : “Such is now my intuitive experience, for [ am Attuned to my Lord's Name”. [4-2-46]

Gauri Busiragan, Tipadas

When my breath was turned-in, I pierced through the six ‘lotuses’ of the body and my Mind was fixedly
centred on the Void (of Dispassion),
O man of Detachedness, search thou such a Lord who comes not, nor goes. [J]
For, the mind that turns away (from the world of senses), Merges in the Lord.
It is through the Guru's Grace that I became Wise, otherwise? I was an Ignorant? wretch. /J-Pawse]
That what was near has now become far, and the far has become near: it is how one takes it.
It ts like the juice* of sugar* : he, who Tastes it, alone knows its Taste. /2/
To whom shall I recite Thy Gospel, Lord, which is beyond the three Modes ; who i is there so Wise 7
Says Kabir : “As is the light in one’s mind, so is the illumination of the mind”, [3-3-47]
Gauri
Where there is no sea, nor are any rains*®, where there's neither sun mor Shade, neither création nor
dissolution,
Neither life nor death, neither pain nor pleasure ; where there’s only absolute trance, but no Duality, [7]
Such wondrous, O men, is the state of Equipoise.
One can weigh it not, nor is it exhausted ; it is neither‘light nor heavy, {/-Pause]
Where there are no ups and downs, neither night nor day,
Where there's neither water nor air, nor fire,—there doth my True Guru Abide, [2]
(In such a state), our Lord, Unfathomable, Unreachable, Abides in our inner Self ; Him one finds -

through the Guru's Grace.
Says Kabir : “I ama Sacrifice unto my Guru whom [ Meet in the Society of the Saints", /3-4-48]

Gauri

I've bought over the two Bullocks of Good and Evil ; my Capital is the 3 air which keeps me yoked to them.
‘And the Bulls carry the bags of inner Desire : this is how we all trade?! [J )
Such is our Lord, the Merchant-king,
That the whole world has become His pedlar. {J-Pause]
Lust and Wrath are the tax-gatherers and the waves of the mind are the highwaymen :
The five elements (of the body) distribute the loot of these : this is how our goods are ferried across®! [2]
Says Kabir :“‘Hearken, O ye Saints, such is my state now,
That the Bull (of Evil) is exhausted going uphill, and has shaken the bag (of Desire) off its back".
[3-5-49]
Gauri, Panchpada

In the Parent's home one’s stay is brief : in the end one goes to the In-laws.
But the brides, Blinded by Ignorance, know it not. [J

Why has’ the Bride (heedlessly) worn her usual Wear’,

When the Groom has arrived to take her away in Marriage? [I-Pause/

1, Lit. instrument.
2. age (aras)=a'-s2 ; aul si, otherwise.

3.0 dare (30) = 4-ferrra, ignorant.
4, ~e@el (waradt) : According to Kahan Singh, the word means Mahua, a flower, from which wine js extracted.

5. q3gr (ater) : Kahan Singh translates it a3 ‘wine’. 2
6. aves (area) : rainy season
7. ei (ziz)=2iz (of Dingal dialect), merchandise or caravan. "ae
8. ie. life is wasted away.
9. suit (wetat) =e), a simple usual wear. \
5 -

Page 37
POPPCHACOCLOSECOOCECHCECEELCOCEE

[ 324 ]

’ The Well of life) seems full ; but who is there with a long string (of Time) ?

For, the string breaks along with the Pitcher (of breath) , and the Water-carrie! passes away (in grief).
2

If the Cota, however, be Merciful, and Fulfils Himself His own Tasks, P, 334
Then the Bride is Approved, for, she. then Dwells on the Guru's Word, /3/]

If she reflects, she knows, that she is'ied by her past.

What then shall we say to her, for, what can the poor souldo? [4

Frustrated, she leaves the world ; her mind is held not.

So, repair thou to thy Lord's Feet, O Kabir, and seek His Refuge, /5-6-30]

Gauri

Says the Yogi,"“Sweet is Yoga : there's not another as sweet”.

The shaven ones, of amputated Jimb!, uttering but one word*, say : ‘‘We have become the adepts”. [J]

But without the Lord, the Blind man walks in Doubt.

And to whomsoever he goes to get Release, he himself js found to be Bound, [/-Pause]

When one Merges in wherefrom one issued forth, then alone one forsakes this path,

But if one goes . the Pundits, the wise ones, the warriors and men of charity, they proclaim their own
vanity, /2

He alone Xnoke the Lord’s Essence, to whom He, the Lord, Reveals Himself.

What is the merit of living without Knowing ?

So, meet thy Guru that thy Ignorance is dispelled and thou altainest the Jewel (of the Lord's Name). [3]

Give up looking towards Evil on thy right and left, but gaze upon the Seat of the Lord (who tastes so
sweet),

(But), says Kabir,“If the dumb one tastes sugar, how can he tell what its taste be, /{4-7-5/]

Rag Gauri Poorbi, Kabirji
By the Grace of the One Supreme Meing, the Hternal, the Hnlightener.

The life that was here is no more here ; the five elements have scattered.
Now, where is the one who was engaged in the vain pursuit of yogic practices? ? [J]

The string of his life has snapped; the enveloping (consciousness) has disappeared; where now is his
yocal (Soul) absorbed ?

This doubt haunts me ever and no one resolves it for me. /J-Pause/

The body, which mirrored the whole universe, is no more there, nor ¢ven its prompter, the mind:

He, who forges the elements together, remains apart : where then does the Soul go to abide ? [2/

So long as we are only a mortal frame (without a Soul), we Unite not (with the Lord), nor can we tear
ourselves apart (from Maya). .

Then whom can we own as our Master, whose Servants can we be?’ Where then is our Soul to
Merge? /3]

Says Kabir : “‘Attune thyself to thy Lord and abide evér in Him.

For, he alone Knows His Own Mystery and He lives eternally and for ever”. [{4-J-52/

Gauri

Let Contemplation and Remembrance be thy two ear-rings, let Gnosis‘ be thy coat,

Let thy mind be seated in the Void of desirelessness, and let the stilling of Craving be thy Path. [J]

O my King, I am a man of Dispassion, a Yogi ;

So I Die not, nor any one grieves for me, nor am I separate from Thee. /J-Pawuse/

The life that throbs in the universe is my horn ; to look upon the world as ashes is my bag.

And when I am Attuned (to my Lord), I rise above the three Modes ;

So [ live in the midst® (of the world), and yet Detached am [. [2]

The mind and the breath are the two hollow pumpkins, and the ages are the connecting rod of the fiddle.

P.
And, when the strings (of Consciousness) are in harmony, then there issues forth the Unbeaten Melody
(of the Word), /3]

1. As some get their sex-organm removed or their cars torn.

2. Like ‘4tlakh—Alakh' (the Unknowable Lord), etc.

3. Lir, the right and left and middle channels of the vital breath.

4. ualhfa (off) : (Sans. sft), Lit. wisdom that one gathers through Pramana or sources of knowledge,
3. unal (cart) ouraral, uaa fee : in the world.

222382220200 Guru-Granth Salih
Hearing it, the Mind is composed, and unaffected by Maya, it vacillates not,
Says Kabir: “A Vairdgi, who plays such a play in life, comes not again to the world of form". {4-—25-3]

Gauri

Nine organs’, ten faculties, twenty-one elements’, are the warp,

Sixty veins, nine joints arid seventy two major veins are the woof, /7J/

Lo, life is out to weave itself into a pattern’ ;

Leaving her own (real) Home, she goes to the weaver, (the world). {/—Pauwse/

Its (desire) can be measured not, nor can it be weighed ; its food is two and a half seers (a day),
And if it receives not its daily fare, it quarrels with the mind*. [2]

It stays for a brief time arrayed against’ its Lord, but it gets not the opportunity again.

And leaving his pots and pans, and his world wet (with tears), the weaver passes away, sad at heart. [3]
The shuttle is now empty, no thread it weaves nor the threads are involved,

Says Kabir : “Still the waves of thy desire even now, O poor soul,

I pray thee, carry not thy burden along in the Yond". [4-3-54]

Gauri

When the Soul Merges in the Over-soul, does anything" of it then remain ; O nay’.

The body from which issues forth not the (Lord’s) Name, breaks in death. [J]

O dark" beauty, O my sweet-heart,

My mind is Attuned to Thee. [J-Pause]

When I Meet the Guru-saint, I attain Perfection, what use are to me the Yoga or indulgence ?
For, when the two of us Meet, my Task is accomplished, and I am United with my Lord. /2/
Teople think this my utterance is a mere song, but this indeed treasures the Wisdom of the Lord,
As does (the Shiva’s) Mantram whispered into a dying man’s ears,

He, who Sings‘ it, hears it, or Attunes himself to the Lord,

Alttains, says Kabir, to the highest state of Bliss. /4—J-4-55]

OCHO

Gauri

The more efforts the egocentrics make, the more they fail to Swim across the Sea of Material Existence,

For, they read the way of works and observe outer discipline, and pseudo-righteousness, but egoism has
burnt their inner core. ae ,

He, who has Blest thee with life and sustenance, why forsake Him, thy Lord, O man ! .

Thy human birth was precious like a jewel, but thou hast gambled it away for a trite. /J-Pause/

Desire is thy thirst and Doubt thy hunger, for, thou Reflectest not on thy Lord in thy mind. “

Intoxicated my self. thy mind (wanders), cheated by Ego, and thou Cherishest. not the Guru's

ord,

Lured away by sense-pleasures, thou drinkest the wine of Evil.

They, who are Destined to meet the Saints, Swim across as doth iron in a bark of wood. /3/

Wearied by the ceaseless Wanderings through myriads of births, I have surrendered, in Pain, to my Lord.

Says Kabir : “Meeting with the Guru, one Drinks the Great Essence, and through Loving Adoration,
one is Redeemed”. [4-1-5-56]

Gauri

Such is the Play of the Lord, O my crazy mind,

That the faked frame of a she-elephant

Makes the he-elephant fall into the trap at the call of lust,

And suffers he the tyranny of the goad on the head, /J] P, 336
3o escape from Sin and Attune thyself to thy Lord, O my crazy mind !

SSCCASSSEOCOCHGGCCOEAGCECESEOCHESSCOESS

Why thou becomest not fearless and Contemplate thy Lord, and board the Boat of thy God ? [J-Pause]

1. Lit, yards.

2. The nine organs are two hands, two feet, two eyes, two carsand mouth, Ten faculties are five Jnanindriyas
and five Karmindrias, Twenty one elements are five Tatfvas, five desires, ten Pramas (vital/aethers or currents) and mind.
Jodh Singh thinks ‘seventy two" here refers to seventy two thousand nerves.

3. Ha (aTgt) : (Sindhi) thread.

4. weorel (vgn) : the master of the house, /e., mind.

5. gaan (tee) —sa-++maA ; opposed to.

6. fefar (firar) : at. .

7. wolfe (wgm)—H-+- ole : at afe.

8. Lit, bluish, which was the colour of Rama's, as well as of Krishna's face,

Guru-Granth Salih 99999929999999299999999999999999999990029999990090*
Page 37

APBSCOCCESCOSOEE

ho)
Page 375

[ 326 ]

The monkey spreads his hands out for a handful of grams,

And can escape not from the trap thereafter and so dances he from door to door. [2]

As the parrot is caught by a lime-twig, O crazy mind, so does Maya entrap us all. \

As is the changing colour of the safflower, so impermanent is the expanse of the world. [3]

O my crazy mind, there are myriads of pilgrim-stations to bathe, and myriads of gods to worship,
But one is Redeemed not thus : one is Emancipated only through the Service of the Lord. {4-/-6-57]

Gauri

Fire does not burn it, nor the winds sweep it away : the thieves can steal it not:

Such is the Treasure of the Lord’s Name: it goes never. [J]

My only Wealth is my Lord, Supporter of the earth : this is the best and the truest Wealth,

The Peace one finds in the Service of the Lord, that Peace one finds not in dominions. {/—Pause]

For the sake of this Wealth did Shiva and Sanaka and others withdraw themselves from the world.

He, who Enshrines in his mind his Lord, the Redeemer, and on whose tongue is He, him the Noose of
the Yama does not strangle, /2/

One's only Wealth is the Divine Wisdom and the Giuru-given Devotion through which one’s Mind is fixed
on the True Instruction (of the Guru), .

The Lord is like water to the mind on fire, the Mainstay of the wandering mind ; through Him, one is
rid of one’s Doubt and Fear. /3/

Says Kabir : “O thou Just-infected one, reflect on this.in thy heart,

That while thou aren't content with thy countless horses and elephants, I am Content with my only
Lord’. [4-}-7-58]

*

Gauri

As the monkey, with a handful of gram, gives up not bis possession out of greed,

So do men act, lured by Avarice, and those acts become a halter round their'necks. [J]

Without Love-worship (of the Lord), the life wastes itself away,

For, save for the Lord's Worship in the Society of the Saints, nothing is eternally True. /J—Pawse]
As the flower blooms in the wilderness and no one enjoys its fragrance,

So docs man waste himself away, eaten up by Time, birth after birth. /2/

These riches and beauty and sons and daughters which the Lord has created like a passing show,
With them is the man involved, carried away by his sense-desires. /3/

Age is like fire, the body is the temple of straw ; this play is being played on all sides.

“So,” says Kabir, “I have taken to the Guru’s Refuge to Swim across the Sea of Fear", [4-J-8-59]

Gauri

The watery sperm is dirty : the mother’s ovary is like the crimson earth ;

And of this earth (and sperm) is the puppet of a man built. [J/

I am nothing, Lord, nor is anything mine,

For, my body and riches and all other embellishments are Thine. /{J-Pause]

Into this earth (of the body) is the air breathed, P. 337
And by a false trick of power is it moved about, [2]

Some there are who amass the fortune of half a million,

But in the end their Pitcher too breaks, (and they grieve). [3/

Says Kabir : “Thou hast raised thy structure on a false foundation,

For thou wilt pass away in a moment, O thou conceited man!" [{4-J/-9-60]

Gauri

Contemplate thy Lord in the same way,

As did Dhruva and Prablada Dwell on their Lord. //]

O Thou Support of the supportless, I lean on Thee alone :

And so have put myself and all my Kinsmen on Thy Boat (to be Ferried across), /J-Pause]
When it pleaseth Thee, Thou makest one submit to Thy Will,

And (so doing), his Load is taken across (to the other shore). [2]

By the Guru's Grace such Wisdom now is Enshrined in my Mind,

That my comings and goings have for ever ceased. 3] .

Says Kabir : **Contemplate Thy Lord, the Supporter of the earth,

For both here and Hereafter, thy only Beneficent Lord is He, the One alone", [4-2-J0-s]]

Gaurl 9

When one is delivered from the mother’s womb into the world.
One abandons God as soon as one begins to breathe. /J/
O my Soul, Sing thou the Praises of thy Lord. /J-Pause]

9-9-3-29-2239292022900 Guru-Granth Saubhib
In one’s mother’s womb one practises austerities, standing on the head,
When one is being baked in the fire of the womb. [2 ;
Through myriads of births one travels to attain the human birth :
And, if one loses this birth too, there will be no place for him. 3]
Says Kabir : “Dwell thou on thy Eternal Lord, ‘
Who neither comes nor goes", [4-J-I]-62]

Gauri Poorbi

Seek not the abode of heaven, nor fear the deeps of hell,
For, that which has to happen must happen : so build no hopes in the mind, J]
Utter thou the Lord's Praise,

For, from Him one gathers the Treasure of Eternal Bliss. {J-Pause]
What use are contemplation, austerities or self-discipline ; what use are the fasts or bathings at the

holies,
So long as one knows not the Way of Loving Adoration of the Lord? [7 2]
Be not enraptured by thy riches ; grieve not at thy woes,
For, the riches are as is poverty and both come from thy God. [3],
Says Kabir : “Now I have known that the Lord Abides in the hearts of the Saints :
And, the Lord’s Devotee is he in whose heart Dwells the Lord.” [4-J-J2-63/

Gauri

O my mind, no one, whose burden you now carry, belongs to thee,
This world is like the perch of the birds on a tree. [J]
Taste, therefore, the Essence of thy Lord,
Which makes thee forsake ail other tastes. {J-Pause]
Why weep over the passing of others when we ourselves will not stay :
For, he, who's born will pass away : why then grieve in vain? [2] .
The womb of which one is delivered for that one becomes crazy (while young), the breasts one is fed
upon (in infancy), one fondles (in passion).
Says Kabir : “When I Dwelt upon my Lord and Enshrined Him in my Consciousness, Dispassion filled
my mind”, {3-2-/3-64)
. Rag Gauri
The Bridé gazes at the pathway, sighing and with tearful eyes. ;
Her heart is satiated not, and with firm steps (she stands) longing for the sight of her Lord. /IJ] F.338
O black crow, fly up (and convey my distress to my Love),
That I Meet Him instantly, who is my Beloved and Lord. /J-Pouse]
Says Kabir : “Contemplate thy Lord for Eternal Life,
For, the Lord's Name is our only Mainstay ; so Utter thou His Name”. [2-/-J4-65]
Rag Gani 11

Where there is thick growth of the Tulsi-plant, there in the woods my Lord Sings with joy.
Secing his sight, the esherdess is enraptured and says :

“O Lord, do not leave me ; come, be thou near unto me.” [J]

O Lord, wielder of the bow, [ am Attuned to Thy Feet,

But he alone Meets with Thee, whose Destiny is Awakened, /J-Pause]

In Vrindaban, Krishna, the beauteous enticer of the mind, grazes his cows :

© Lord, he, of whom Thou art the Master, his name is Kabir. /{2-2-15-66]

; Gauri Poorbi 12
Several garbs man wears and dwells in the forest :
oO iad art thou deceived by gods 7? Why, O wise one, dost thou dip thy body (for ablution), pray 7
I know, O' man, thou wilt pass away,
So know thy Eternal Lord, O Ignorant one | .
Why dost thou cling to Maya which now seems here, now nowhere. [J-Pause]
Even wisemen and men of contemplation and teachers of others are involved with the world.
Says Kabir ; “Without the Lord's Name, this world ig Blinded by Maya, [2-/-16-67]

Gaurf'12

O my mind, leave thy Doubts, and Dance in the open : these Doubts are the whippings of Maya (on thy

Soul), F
What kind is the hero who shows his back in the battle 7. What kind the Sati who, when the call-comes,
starts assembling her pots and pans? j/] -- ;
- ; 26 - = . . - —— van _— 6)
Gure-~Granth Salih 999999990999999099999999999999999999222999999090"

Page 37
© crazy mind, waver not upon thy Path,
For, now is the time to Burn thyself and Die to attain Perfection, now that thou hast taken upon {thyself
the challenge of death’, /J-Pause] -
The whole world is wasted away, lured by Lust and Wrath and Maya ;
So leave not thy Lord, O Kabir, for, He is the Highest of the high. /2-2-/7-68/

Gauri 13

I know Thy Command is upon my head ; so I doubt it not. :

Thou art the River, Thou the Boatman®, Thou art our only Saviour, O Lord! [1/

O thou Lord's Servant, choose the Service of thy Lord,

Whether thy Lord Loves thee, or is cross with thee. [/-Pause/

As the flower blooms in water, so is Thy Name my Mainstay, O Lord !

Says Kabir: “I am Thy bond slave, Lord, slay me or vivify me as Thou Willest". (2-18-697

Gauri

(They say) wandering through myriads of species, Krishna's father, Nanda, was tired ;

And then he Dwelt upon God and God was born in his house ; how fortunate was he! J]

Say they all that Krishna was Nanda’s son,

But know ye, whose son was Nanda himself ? .

When the earth and the sky and the ten directions weren't there, where was this Nanda then ? [J-Pause]
‘Nay, our Immaculate Lord is incarnated not, nor does he suffer the pangs (of birth and death).  P. 339
Kabir’s Lord and Master is He who neither has father nor mother, [2-/9-70]

Gauri

Slander me, O ye men, slander me,

For, slander seems so sweet to me.

Slander is dear to me like my father and mother, //-Pause]

If someone slanders us, we go to the heavens, |

And enshrine in our minds the Blessing of the Lord’s Name.

Our heart is purified if we are slandered,

For, the slanderer but washes the dirt of our wears. [iJ

He, who slanders me, is my best friend,

For, I always attend to what the slanderer says.

It is the slanderer who stops others from slandering me again :

itis the slanderer who accepts (only the evil of) my life. /2/

I am therefore in love with slander,

For, slander Saves and Emancipates me.

Kabir, the Lord's Servant, knows the essence of slander,

And so knows he too, that the slanderer is Drowned, while Kabir is Ferried across. [3-20-71]

O my Lord, my King, Thou art my Lord, the Fear-free, my Emancipator. {J-Pawse]

When I abide with my self, there Thou art not; _

And when I abide with Thee, there my self is not.

Now that I have become one with Thee, my Mind is satiated, [J]

When I leaned on my cleverness, how could I gather (spiritual) Strength ; now that I have (spiritual)
Wisdom, I have no need for (worldly) power.

Says Kabir : “The Lord has rid me of my selfhood ;

And, now that my mind has changed, I have attained Perfection’. [2-21-72]

Gauri

The structure (of our body) is built upon six lotuses, and within it is the incomparable Thing, the Soul.
In an instant, ry Creator-Lord put the vital breath into it, which, like the lock and key, protects our
Ouse,

O mind, keep thou now Awake :

Being careless, thou hast wasted away thy life and the thieves (of Desire) have broken into thy Home and
tobbed thee (of thy Soul), /J-Pause/

The five Watchmen, which guard thy doors, how can one be sure of their being ever-alert.

But if thou art Awake in thy conscious mind, thou wilt be [Jumined, [2]

1. Of. The vermillion-sprinkled coconut (which is given in the hands of the woman before she performs Sat! on
the pyre of her husband).
2. adh (atta) : who works the oars (qgt), £2. boatman.

I99222029022290 Guru-Granth Salih

Page 37
The mind! which is led astray by the nine organs (of the body), Attains not the incomparable Thing.
Says Kabir ; “When the pine organs (of the body) are disciplined, the Quintessence (of Truth) is Realised

in the Tenth”. [3-22-73]

Gauri
O mother, I know not of another ! ;
And, in Him resides my vital breath whose Praise Shiva and Sanaka and others Sing. [J-Pause] _
My heart is Ilumined and, becoming Wise, I know the Path that leads to the Guru; and my_ mind is
fixed upon the orbit of its own sky,
And all afflictions of vice and fears and bonds have hastened away, and the Mind finds Peace in its own

innerself. [2]
Follow this wise Instruction, and absorb thyself in thy One Lord, and let not any one other than thy Lord

come into thy Mind.

When the Mind becomes fragrant with the. perfume of Chandan, then thy self is rid of Ego. [2]

He, who Sings the Lord’s Praise, he is the Abode of our Lord, the God.

His Destiny is Awakened and Fortune smiles on him, in whose mind Dwells the Lord. /3/

I have sundered the Bonds of Maya, and I am Illumined by the Poise of the Soul: I now Merge in the
One alone. P, 340

Says Kabir: “Meeting the Guru, [ have attained Supreme Bliss: my Wanderings have ceased and my
Mind is Pleased with the Lord.” {4-23-74]

Rag Gauri Poorbi
Bawan Akbari of Kabirji
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Hternal, the All-pervading,
the Creator, the Purusha, the Enlightener.

Through the fifty two letters (of the alphabet), one can describe the three worlds and more :

But these letters will be forgotten, yet He who will remain eternally cannot bedescribedthroughthem, /J/

Where there is speech, there‘are words :

And where there are no words, the mind rests not on, Nothing.

In words as in wordlessness Abides He the Lord,

But as and what He is, that no one can perceive, nor tell. /2/

Even if | knew the Lord, what shall I say of Him; whatever I say of Him is of little avail.

For, He’s like the seed of the banyan tree, spread out into and over the three worlds, [3]

When God is Attained, His Mystery seems to have been shattered : but only a partof His Mystery is

vealed,

(Though) the Mind is rid of Duality and is pierced through (with the Lord’s Name), and one Attains to
the Indivisible Lord. [4/

One is known a Muslim if he follows the Muslim way, and a Hindu if he follows the Vedas and the Puranas.

But one’s mind becomes Wise only if one learns the Wisdom (of God),

I know only Onkar, the One Supreme Being, who's the source of everything,

But him, whom He Creates and Destroys, in him I have no faith,

He who Knows his Lord,

Is obliterated not, for, Knows he his Eternal God. [6]

Kakka
When the sun-light (of Wisdom) Illumines the Lotus (of one’s heart),

Then the moon-shine (of M4ya) comes not into the basket (of the Mind).

And the Fragrance and Flavour of the Soul in Bloom that one now finds is unutterable :
For even if one utters, who his there to understand ? [7]

Khakha

My Mind has now entered into its inner cave,

And, as it abides there, its Wanderings cease,

He, (whose way is this,) Knows his Master and Compassion comes into him,

And becomes Eternal he : he dies not thereafter, [8]

Gagged .

He, who knows the import of the Guru's Word,

And pays no heed to what another says,

He becomes a man of Dispassion and his Wanderings cease.

The Unseizable Lord he Seizes ; and so Seizing Him, abides in the Heaven (of Super-c. ousness). [9]

1. £8. the woman.

Guru Granth Sahib enee22saedeanqv00n2000000000000000000000000900004

a

Page 37

BABWCUSECECOSSGOOSEOC OBOCESBASCOECECPOCOESESSISSSOSSLECAE CODSESSCSSSGOCCOGEG EERE
vt)
5
&
5
5
(5
4
c
€
5
c
5
5
(i
&

e
e
(
<

Ghagha

The Lord Abides in all hearts.

Even when the pitcher (of the body) breaks, He goes not.
When within my heart I've found His Path,

Then why forsake it and walk upon another? [/0]

Gangin
Restrain thyself ; love thy God and still thy Doubt.
Don't run away from what thou hast not seen : this, pray, is the highest Wisdom, [J 1)

Chacha

Wondrous is the picture of the world thy Lord has painted before thee,

But heed not the picture ; remember the Painter,

The picture is wonderful : this is what creates confusion in the mind (and leads one astary),

But leave thou the thoughts of the picture, and remember the Great Painter, the only He. fiz}

Chhachha

This, indeed, is the Way of the King of the universe,

Why not then give up all other hopes and be pleased’ with thy Lord ?

O my mind, I instruct thee every moment

Not to forsake thy Lord, and be not bound (to coming and going), //3/
JSajji

He, who while yet alive, Dies ‘to his self) :

And Burns he his youth and ceauty, finds the Path.

He, who burns (the desire for) his own possessions, and also (the hope of) the others’ treasures’,
He in his heart is Mlumined by the Light of God. [74]

Shajha

I am involved with the world and know net how to escape. BP, 31
I am fear-ridden and so I am Approved not by the Lord.

Why should I instruct others the discursive way,

For, discursiveness yields nothing but strife, / 45]

SOCGECOCEECCCOCCECOCEEECECCECOCCOCES

= AS

Janjan

He, who Abides so near, within our own hearts, why forsake Him, and go out into the yond in His
search,

He, For whom I searched the whole worid through, Him I found so near, within. [J6]

Tata

The Path that seems so treacherous, is within the heart,

Why not open the Door and enter into the Self ?

When I See the Eternal, Immovable One, I am led not astary :
Then [ Cling to Him and Know Him within my Home. [17]

Thathé

e)
-)
)
() [ have removed far the mirage* of my mind :
- With a great effort, I have calmed the mind-waves.
ei The Maya that has beguiled the whole world
= Has been trapped by me and so my mind is at Peace. [18]
2 ‘Daddé
Pt If the Lord's Fear comes into one’s mind, one is afraid of nothing.
2 For, the Fear (of the Lord) destroys al] other fears.
If one Fears not one’s Lord, then other fears cling to one.
But, if one becomes fear-free (like the Lord), then all (earthly) fears hasten away from one’s heart, [72]
- Dhadha
a Why search Him out in other directions ?
For, in this unavailing search one loses (the merit of) one’s life.
When I come back from this vain search over the mountains far, |
I find Him who built the fortress (of. my body), abiding within (my heart), {20]
2

i. afar fa = aay (wfe fie = ugg) ¢ why not (fx 3") remain (gag) pleased (efa),
2. aAnle uanfe (aewtt Torfe) ; fit. burning (af) one's own (nif) and others’ (ula) Possessions.
3. sale (sri) : stat (water) that cheats (the eys) ; ie. mirage.

PI 2) Guru-Granth Salih .

Page 379 
A man who énters the battle-field sticks’ to his puns,

He yields not, nor compromises he (with Evil).

His life is considered Blessed

Who stills the one (mind) and gives up many (desires), /2//
Tarta ;

The impassable (Sea of Existence) is crossed not by one
Whose body is involved with the affairs of the three worlds.

But, when the three worlds‘are Merged in the Mind, —
Then the Real meets with the Real, and Truth is attained, [22]

Tharini
The Lord is Unfathomable, no one can fathom up His Deeps, :
For, the Lord is Infinite, while the seeker stays not. i,
But nevertheless over a small earth one builds (one’s hopes)

And seeks he to support its structure without the Pillars, /23/

Daddi

We see what will pass uway :

So, Contemplate thou Him whom thou see-est not.

When one opens and enters the Tenth door, '
One Sees then the Presence of the Compassionate Lord. [24] ;

Dhadha

If one goes from this world to the higher one’, one is Saved.

Then one's lower self Merges in the Higher Self.

He who abandons what is below to mount to the one on high, ;
He gathers Peace ; the lower Merging in the Higher (Self). {23 |

Nanna
My days and nights pass, looking’ into the Yond,
And so my Eyes have reddened (with a long wait).
. But, when after the wait, my Eyes See the Vision,
Then I Merge in Him whom I was looking for. [26]
Pappa
The Lord is boundless : I'can know not his bounds,
So I Attune myself to the Light of lights.
And, I discipline my five sense-desires,
And rise higher than the (bounded) state of good and evil. [27]
Phaphd
The fruit (of Gnosis) one gathers (through God's Grace), without flowers (of wrought deeds).
If one partakes of that fruit (of Gnosis),
One passes not again through the vale (of death), reflecting on that Wisdom.
For, even a slice of that Fruit destroys (future) births. {28
Babba
When the drop mingles with the drop
Then the drops separate not one from the other.
The (Lord's) Servant is he who seeks the Worship of the Lord.
For, he, who Prays to his Lord, for him the Lord cares like a kinsman. [29/ P, 342
Bhabha
When the cavity of Doubt is filled,
One loses one’s fear, and Faith in him is instilled.
And He, who is without, then also is Revealed within,
And so. Knowing the Mystery, one Realises one's Kingly Lord. /30/
Mammi ;
When one clings to the Real, one’s mind is reconciled.
He, to whom the Mystery’is Revealed, alone Knows his mind.
1. Sat (gt) : (Arabic), fit, farsightedness,
2 »en Safa (artatg gefiz) : (Sans. aa; ged), |i. this world and that.
3. faaea (Freat) : looking.

@uru-Granth Subib 999929992299999299999299929999999999992922299990090"

Page 38

ERE SHEE EE yy, Reretefererererereferereycrcrcrc Coie ety

SRIGESCCCEGESCOAS

a
[ 332]

So tarry not in the Meeting of thy Mind with thy Lord.

For, he alone, who is Attuned to the Lord, Knows the Truth. [31]

Mamma

Thy task is with thy mind : for, if one disciplines the mind, one attains Perfection.

Says Kabir ; “The mind can only converse with the Mind : there is no meeting better than the meeting
of Minds". [32]

This mind is Shakti, this mind is Shiva},

This mind is the essence of all the five elements.

He, who takes this mind to the Higher Regions and there abides he ;

To him (alone) is Revealed the Mystery of the three worlds. /33/

FYaypa

If one has Wisdom, let him destroy his Evil and discipline his body?.
For, one is called a hero only if, being engaged in a battle, one deserts not the battle-field, [34]

Rara

I have found the Taste of Tastelessmess*.

Realising this Tastelessness, I have known what Relish is.

For, he, who relishes not the world of senses, Relishes the world of Spirit,
And he, who Tastes God, relishes not this world, /35]

Lallé

One should’ so Attune oneself to God

That one goes not to another and attains to the highest Truth.

He, who Loves his God and is inebriated with Him,

Knows his God, and so Knowing, Merges in His Presence. {36

Fava

Contemplate thy God again and over again,

For, Contemplating thy Lord, one loses not (the Battle of Life).

I’m a Sacrifice unto him who Sings the Praise of the Lord’s Saints‘.

He who Meets with his God, to him is Revealed the whole Truth. /37/

Fava

Know thou Him, for Knowing Him one becomes He,

And, When He Meets with thee, no one can tell who’s who? = /38/
Sassa

Discipline thy mind the perfect way,

50 control thy mind that it is Pleased with its imner Self,

Know thou that where the Lord’s love cozes out in such a state,
There the Lord of the three worlds Himself Abides. [39]

Khakha

If one goes out in search (of God),

And searches with all his heart, he’s born not again.
He, who searches and finds and reflects (on his Find)
Swims across the Sea of Existence in an instant. /40/

Saxsa

The True Bride is she whose Couch the Lord Decks (with His Presence).
She alone is right who stills her Doubt.

Having given up the little pleasures, she attains Supreme Bliss,

And is called she the True Bride, and He her only Lord. [47]

Haha
He is, and yet I know not that He is,
But only when I know He is, does my mind attain Peace.

He forsure is, only if I were to comprehend Him,
For, when He's Seen, then He alone seems, not me. [42]

lL. Shake’: energy ; Shiva : Spirit.

2, Lit, the village of thy body.

3. i. desirelessness, dispassion.

4. fara 3a! (fara wat) ; of Vishnu's sons (3a"), fee. Saints.
*. rb * “ss ———

PTT OTD O) Guru-Granth Salnb
“T'll have this, I'll have this,” the whole world yells :

And this is the cause of the world’s afflictions,

But he who Loves the Lord of Lakshmi,

All his Woes are effaced and he attains Bliss. [43]

Khakha

Many have wasted away their lives in vain pursuits, 7 sa
And being so wasted away, they minded not their Lord. ~
If now they realise the reality (of the world), and so tranquil their minds,

They Join Him eternally from whom they were far removed. /44)

The fifty-two letters are put together (by all), . P, 343
But no one can decipher the only Word (of God).

Kabir speaks nothing but the words of Truth,

For, he, who is a Pundit must keep his Intuition awake.

The Pundits but trade in letters,

But, the Wise will reflect on nothing but the Quintessence of Truth.

He alone who has a mind such as this,

Will know the Real, the Essence of things. [45]

Rag Gauri
Thitti of Kabirji

Bp the Grace of the One Supreme Weing, the Hternal, the Enlightener.

Shaloka

He who tells of the fifteen lunar and the seven week-days (a5 auspicious, inauspicious),
Is néither here nor there.

But the Devotee and the Wise one, who knows the Mystery,

Becomes himself the Creator-Lord, himself the God, [i} ~

Thitti
On the day of ihe new moon, abandon thy hope,

And know intuitively the Essence of thy Pure Source and the Word, [J]

Thou shalt then Love the Lotus Feet of thy Lord,

And thy heart shall become Pure, by the Saint’s Grace, and thou shalt be ever Awake to the Lord's
Praise, [J-Pause}

On the first day af the moon, Dwell on thy Loved Lord,

Who Plays within thy body, being Himself bodyless, Infinite.

Then neither Time nor Craving destroys thee,

And thou Mergest in the Primeval Man, /2/

On the second day, know thou that within thee sport

Both Maya and God, who Permeate thee through and through.

But he, who Loves his only Casteless and Immaculate Lord (is content).

He neither goes up, nor comes down, [3]

On the third day, he, who maintains equilibrium of the three Modes,

Attains the highest state of Sublime Bliss.

Within him is born the Faith in the Society of the Saints,

And both from within and without, he is Ilumined. [4/

On the fourth day, hold thy mercurial mind,

And keep not company with Lust and Wrath.

And thou then becomest He, the Lord, who is upon the earth ang in waters,

And then thou Contemplatest thyself, for, then thow art He.

On the fifth day, know thou that the world is evolved out of a elements,

And is engaged wholly in the pursuit of gold and women ;

Rare’s the one who Drinks the Nectar of the Lord's Love :

And then age wears out not him, nor death, nor woes afflict. /6/

On the sixth day, the six- sphered? body runs about in six directions*.

It steadies not, if uninitiated into the Mystery of its Lord.

So, still thy Duality and hold fast to Compassion,

And, then thou sufferest not the Pangs that go with the way of works, /7]

1, Le. Six Chakras, as the Yogis believe.
2. East, West, North, South, Upwards, and Downwards.

Guru-Granth Sahih 99999990909999909999929999999999999999398999999090")
Page 38

=
&)
a
a
eB)
oo
&)
io
af
e)
GJ
J
at
ES
o
-)
a
al
all
&)
EJ
)
a
e)
-
o
=
2
J
a
®
And Enshrine in thy mind the Inner-knower of thy heart. 2
Thou shalt then attain Deliverance even while bound to life. |
2
3
2
4
{ 334 }

On the seventh day, take this my word? as true,

That whosoever is Approved by his Lord, Alttains to Him.

His Doubt is stilled, and his Woes are effaced,

And he attains Bliss, Bathing in the Pool of Dispassion*®. 8):

On the eighth day, know thou that the eight tissues make up thy body,

And, within it, Abides the Casteless He, thy King, the Great Treasure.
Attaining the Guru, thou Knowest this Wisdom, this Mystery,

That His ways are different : that (Permeating all), He remains Indivisible and Infrangible. [9]
On the ninth day, discipline thy nine Doors,

And bind down thy wandering Desire.

And forsake all Avarice and Infatuation,

And live thou eternally, partaking of the Fruit of Immortality. //0] P. 344
On the tenth day, thou wilt find Bliss in all the ten directions,

And thy Doubt will be stilled, and thou wilt Attain to thy God,

Who is the Embodiment of Light, the Incomparable Quintessence (of Reality),
Stainless nor stained, neither sunshine nor shade. [JI]

On the eleventh day, let thy mind run in the only direction (of God),

And then.thou passest not through the pain of the womb again.

Thy body is Purified and is Cooled,

And he, who scems far, is found near. [/2]

On the twelfth day, twelve Suns seem to blaze (in the mind),

And, eternally, within, Rings the Song of Joy, Unstruck.

And now one Sees the Lord of the three worlds.

How wondrous the play that man has become God! [13]

On the thirteenth day, the thirteen* holy books proclaim

That the Lord is to be witnessed alike, above and below.

For Him, there's no high or low, honourable or dishonourable, .
For, the Lord Pervades all alike, all over, /[J4/

On the fourreenth day, See thou Him in the fourteen worlds',

For, the Lord Pervades every particle, every hair of thine.

So fix thy mind on Truth and Contentment,

And utter thou nothing but the Wisdom of the Lord. //5/

On the full-moon day, | see the full Moon rise in the sky (of my Mind),
Wherever it shines, its rays Iumine me with Equipoise,

The Lord Stays eternally : in the beginning, the middle, and the end is He,
And, in this Pool of Bliss does Kabir abide. [1/6]

Rag Gauri, Seven Days of Kabirji
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Htermal, the Wulightener.

I Sing the Praises of my Lord, over and over again.

Attaming to the Guru, the Mystery of the Lord is Revealed to me, /{J-Pause]
He, who on Sunday commences the Meditation on the Lord,

And, in the mansion of the body stills his desires,

His Consciousness abides uninterruptedly in Poise,

And then Rings the Music of Eternity in his Mind, [i]

On Monday, the (God's) moon rains Nectar on man :

Tasting it, he js rid of all Evil in an instant.

And his Mind is held through the (Guru's) Word,

And the Mind is Intoxicated with the Lord’s Nectar. /2/

On Tuesday, one should know one’s limitations’,

And know also the way the Five Thieves break into one’s mind.
They, who forsake their Home, and go out in search of their Lord,
On them forsure is the Displeasure of God®! /[3/

t, gta (avar)—aan (word).

Lit. vacuum or void.

Lit. thirteen Agams (he. four Vedas, six Shastras, Smritis, Puranas, and Temiric Shastras).

Seven heavens and seven underworlds.

wrifa (arétfr) : (Arabic), reality.

. wtge vat fait 8 athe (are war Pot 2 ce) : otherwise (=-ga, sal gt) the Master (af) will forsure (wa)
be displeased (fai 3).

Paap

022000 Guru-Granth Balib
On Wednesday, one should Wlumine one's mind,

And Enshrine in it his Lord and Master.

And Meeting the Guru, he should raise himself to the level of his God;

And so overturn the inverted Lotus of the mind, /4/

On Thursday, one should wash off all one's sins,

And forsaking the Trinity have faith in the One alone.

At the Confluence (of God) converge the three streams (of works, gnosis and devotion).
Why not then wash one’s sins off at this Confluence, night and day ? /3/ :

He who, on Friday, bears with his God, his Vow is fulfilled,

And then his Self grapples each day with his self,

And holds he his Eve sense-organs,

Then he falls not into the error of seeing the Other. [6]

On Saturday*, one should keep at an even pitch

The Light of the wick that burns within one's heart.

And then he sees his within and without Ilumined all,

And so he destroys the Crop of all his past. [7

So long as in one's heart is the obedience to another’, P. 345
So long one gathers not the profit in one’s Self.

When Contemplating the Lord one Loves one's Lord,

“Then", says Kabir, “‘one becomes Pure of limb”. /&/

Rag Gaori Cheti of Namdevji
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Hulightener-

O God, Thou hast caused the Stones to Swim across,

Then he, who Utters Thy Name, why shal] not he be Saved 7? [ J-Pause]

Thou hast Saved Ganikd, the harlot ; Kubja, shorn of beauty ; and Ajamal, the hunter ;
And they‘, who aimed at Thy Lotus-Feet.

Sacrifice am | unto him who Utters Thy Name. /J]

-restored to his throne,
Through Thee, O Namdeva's Master, were Saved even those devoid of meditation, austerity or works:

(Wilt Thou Save not me?) f2=/)
Rag Gauri Guarcri, Couplets of Ravidasji

By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the ternal, the All-perpading,
the Greater, the Purusha, the Hnlightener.

My constant companion is Evil? : I'm ever oppressed by this thought.
My deeds are perverse : my birth is low, [J

O my Lord, my Master, the vital breath of my life,

Forsake me not, for, | belong to Thee, {/-Pause]

Eflace my Woes : Bestow Thy Love upon me.

Even if ] lose the power of my body, I'll leave not Thy Lotus-Feet. /2/

Says Ravidas : “QO Lord, I have sought Thy Refuge,

Gather me instantly into Thy Skirt and tarry not.” [3-J]

“Griefless’ is the name of my Town,

Where abide not either pain or care.

No anguish there of tax on goods,

-Neither fear, nor error, nor dread, nor decline. [JJ

Oh | how wondrous is my fatherland,

Where there is‘always Peace and Calm, O friend! {J-Pause} 7,

&)
“1. paul (avat) : (Sans. qtr), who control sense-organs, j

EJ
e)
é)
a
Cl
e)
3
a
=A
p)
“)
f)
@)
EJ
E)
)
)
}
p
=!
a
a
a
é
3
3
a
3
2
Vidura, the slave-girl’s son; and Sudama, Krishna’s humble friend, were Saved and Upgrasena was |

2. arga (uret) : (Sans. wiraz), nates, Saturday,

3. nits (aq) : (Sans. aq), another.

4, The reference is to the hunter who aimed at a deer and unintentionally hurt Krishna.
5. i (ara) ; (Persian), low.

Guru-Granth Sahih 999990299999999999999990999999999909020229990900904

’

Page 38
[ 336 ]

Ever-enduring is the Regime of my only Lord over that Land,
And there is not a second nor a third there, but my only Lord,
Populous as ever, its Repute is eternal :

And, there abide only the Rich and the Content. [2]

And there men go about as and where they wish : Es
They know the Mansion of their Lord, so no one prevents (them),

Ravidas, a mere tanner, has been Emancipated in this Land :

And, he. who's his Fellow-citizen is also his Friend. [3-2]

Gauri Bairagan of Ravidasji
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Eulightener-

The Path is treacherous and steep : the bullock (of my body) is feeble and worthless.

My prayer is only to my Lord : O God, Save thou my Capital-stock. [J]

My “goods” are being laden : is there another Pedlar of the Lord (to keep my company) ? ET Patel 6

T too am the Pedlar of the Lord, Dealing in a state of Equipoise.

I have laden the Lord’s Name ; the world carries the load of Evil. [2]

O ye knowers of here and Hereafter', write down my Account as ye will ;

But I am not to pay the Custom of Death, for, I have shaken off all my involvement with the world. /3]
As is the fast-fading colour of safflower, so is this world.

“But”, says Ravidas, the tanner, “the colour of my Lord is fast like madder's." {4-2}

Gauri Poorbi of Ravidasji
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Tnligltener.

I am like a frog in the well ; |] know neither of here nor there.

So enticed am | by Vice that I know not what's good, what's evil, (/]

O Thou Master of all the worlds, Bless me with Thy Vision fora moment, [/-Pause]

O Lord, my mind is soiled and | know not Thy Majesty.

Be Merciful to me that | shed my Doubt ; instruct me so in Thy Wisdom. [2)

The yogis can fathom not Thy Deeps : for, Thy Excellences are beyond words

But Ravidis, the tanner, ulters Thy Praise ; for, he is Dedicated to Thy Loving Adoration. [3-1]

Gauri Bairagan
By the Grace of the One Supreme Being, the Hternal, the Hnlightener,

In Satyayuga, Truth reigned supreme, in Tretd Charity, in Dvapar Worship in Piety.
In the three yeas men held fast to these acts ; but in the Kali-age, one’s only Mainstay is the Lord's
ame, i

How shall I Swim across 7

There's no one who may Instruct me in this Wisdom, that my comings and goings may cease, {J—Pause]

Many are the dissertations on the faiths and many are their followers too,

But which, indeed, are the works that Emancipate and Fulfil, (of these no one knows). [2/

One discriminates between good and evil and hears the Vedas and the Puranas, but one’s Doubt goes
not.

The Doubt abides ever in one’s mind, and there is no one to still our Ego. [3]

From outside we wash the body, but Evil remains within,

How is then one to become Pure? For, like the elephant, one throws dust upon on" ‘“vead so soon
after the bath! [4]

As the world knows, with the break of the dawn the night passes,

And with the touch of the Philosopher's Stone, copper instantly is transmuted into gold. [5]

If this be in obr Destiny, we Meet with the Guru,

And the Awakened mind finds its God within itself and all its Doors are wide-opened. {6]

When one finds the Way of Worship and one’s mind is Instructed in Truth, one’s Bonds of Doubt are
snapped and one’s Evil noes.

And one’s Mind abides in one’s Lowi through His Love, and one Reflects upon the Merits of the only
Lord ‘who's above the (three) Modes. [7]

I tried (in vain) to hold my mind but tu. Noose of Doubt strangles me,

And this makes Ravidas sad,.for, the Love-.-* --hip of the Lord springs not in his mind, /8-/]

1. Chitra and Gupta, the so-called ‘scribes’ of men's deeds.

S29Q Quru-Granth Sahi
GLOSSARY
OF
TECHNIGAL -FERMS EMPLOYED IN THE GURU GRANTH SAHIB
Ala-Iala (nina-a's) : temptation; ‘snare of the | Alabha (»fe3) : unsearchable .
senses; temportalia Alakh (ory) unknowable
Ala-Janjala ('e-495) : the senses that enchain and | Alipta (»ifmus) detached; unsmeared

bind

Abheda (»#z2) imysterious; not split; mot
differentiated

Abhimana (»fsrs) : pride

Abigata (wires) } : unmanifest

Avigata (»ifea3) :

Abinashi (faa) : indestructible; deathless; that
which cannot be reduced
to nothingness

Abola (=a) ! unutterable; mystique

Achala (»nis) : immovable; firm for ever

hara (7"9"a) :ecode of conduct: culture;
deed; extroversion

Achhala (»afs) : undeceivable

Achhada (ez) : invulnerable; that which can-

Achraja (wea)

not be pierced into
: wonderful; that which cannot
be approached by a verbal

proposition
Achuta (stg) : eternal; moveless
esa (mteR) : hail to thee
Adhara (»rarg) : support; mainstay; foundation
Adi (fz) : the beginning; primal; primeval
Adrishta (ferz) : the unseen; imperceivable
through normal senses
Agadha-bodha (maru- : experience of the fathomless
( ‘8g Numenon
Agadha (mara) .
Agaha (ara) i : unfathomable
Agam (nidiH) : unknowable; (2) a category of
the Tantra

Agochara (dwg)

Agyana (farang

ae

incomprehensible; unreach-
able; imperceptible

} .- 2 (spiritual) ignorance; unwis-
dom: nescience

Ahankara (a's) i ero; individuating principle;

the “J-maker”

Ajapa-japa (mmu-wu) : inyoluntary repetition (of the

Ajara (mina)
Ajiini (naa)
Akal (ntats)

Akal-kala (»ats-

Akara (orara)

Akasha (sa)

Akatha (mada)
Akeha (af)

Page 386

Word); unstriven menmonic
activity
: (Bliss) which cannot be con-
tained
not-incarnated; not subject to
birth and death
: deathless; eternal :
ae") : (nishkal-kala) attributeless, yet
in whom inhere all attributes
: form; delineation
: space; ether;  sky-matter;
sound; (figuratively), mind;
the Tenth Door
ineffable
unutterable

ee

ee ee

fe Be Be Fe

Allah (otra, »teq) Arabic name for one God

Alana (»tg2") saltless (hence tasteless);
monotonous

Amara (613) : immortal

Amola (>t) ! priceless

tiectar of immortality; (figura-
tively) the Name
beginningless

eternal; undyin

Amrita (nif1z)

Anadi (“a'el)
Anhata (»a73)

or

Ananda (maz) : (spiritual) unalloyed bliss
Ananta (»#7) : infinite

Anatha (pata) : supportless

Andaja (stra) : egg-born

Andesa (xféar) : doubt; fear

Andhkar (avara) : utter darkness

Angikar (siailava) : to clasp in embrace; to own
Anhada (mage) : unstruck melody; uncaused

sound; music of spheres

lit. colourless; white; infinite;

absolute

collyrium; light of wisdom;

also the procession of

appearances or illusory forms

Ansa (in, dat) : Hansavtar; one of the ten in-
carnations of Vishnu; also
particle

Antaratma (Heo) =: innerself

Antahkarana (xiggzsz) : mind in the collective sense,

i.e. with Manas (mind),

Budhi Crueliigence) and

Ahankara (ego

inwardness; hie inwardly

inner-knower: discipliner of

oo

Anil (ats)

ae

Anjana (niga)

Antargati (»fzgafs)
Antarjami (»izawt)

ory

the soul

Anubhava (azz) : realisation; direct and intui-
tive knowledge

Anugraha (sala) : grace; merey

Anumana (gH) : inference

Antipa (gu) : (of) peerless beauty; incom-
parable

Anuraga (sata) : love; attachment; magnetism

Apar-Apara (sua-nurd) : transcendent

Apara (mura) : infinite; boundless

Aparasa (»1uadR) : holy; untouchable

Aradha-urdha (»30- gen) : this (world) and that

Archa (»te) : Hower-offering; worship

Ardas (em) : supplication; prayer

Arti! (resi) : the mood of utter humility
and spiritual dependence

Arupa (sau) : without form; formless

Asa (stn) : hope (ef. mansa—desire)

Asana (Ra) : a body-posture; seat

Asankha (»H) : countless: myriads
Aseha (ofa)
Ashta (“Az)
Asthula ("res)

Atamrama (nanan)
Athsatha (sna)

Atita (4x3)
Atma (SH")

Atola (»fa)
Aukhadi (ipsfn)
Alia (spe)

Avagavana (tetsea)
Avagaun (sage)
van-jan (xtee-ae)
Avdhuta (fzgz)
Avtira (Hrsg)

Babal (a'gs)
Bahar (aga)

Bajra (973)
Bakhshinda (sufie)
Bakhshisha (seta)
Balihari (afewet)
Banda (82)
Bandana (aes)
Bandha (29) }

Bandhana

Bani (wet)

Banjara (Vanjara)
(gen, ena)

Basitha (arts)

j

Beda (Veda) (#t, #2) -:

Bedhna (daa)
Be-parvaha (ye)
(ve parvaha) (euza)

‘til

unbearable

eight

(sthool) gross; material, tangi-
ble, apparent (cf. Sukbam, the
a

Divine spirit ; [mmanent Lord
Sixty-eight {holy pilgrim-
stations of the Hindus)

: detached

: individual

soul; the Self

beyond body and mind

: unweighable; measureless
: medicine; medicament ;
: the seers; men of God-realisa-

tien
transmigration;
coming and going:

metempsychosis

ascetic

: God's incarnation; human
birth

father

outside; the apparent; the

=e ee

world of senses

: hard; adamentine
: the beneficent (Lord); forgiver
: beneficence; bounty

sacrifice; dedication

: slave; disciple

bowings
bondage

: the Word; the (Guru's) Word;

the testament
tradesman; pedlar:
tively) the seeker

(figura-

: intercessor

*

Four Vedas; also the know-
ledge of true sciences
to pierce through

: care-free; he who owes no alle-

Bhagata-Vachhal (7az- :
Pi -3)

Bhagauti (#31)

giance to another

ga (3a) : fate; destiny; lot; portion
Bhagata (Bhakta) 3a : ‘ * ‘partici

devotee; ir,
God)

he who has the attitude of
filial love towards devotees

Participant (in

: follower of Bhagvat: a Vaish-

Bhagti (Bhakti) (saat) :

Bhai, Bh a,
Bhao (#@)
Bheda (#2)

Bhanda (3's)

Page 387

nava. In Sikh Literature,
emanated spirit of God

the doctrine of worship of
God through loving adora-
lion

fear; fear of God

: love: adoration

separateness: difference; dis-
tinguishing characteristic

: vessel (human body): also any

receptacle, material of figura-
tive, é.g., Gyanbhdndd, a text
or book

Bharamia (ax)
Bharosa (zaH")
Bharpiir (saya)
Bhoga (3%)

Bhogi (ail)
Bhuta (33)

Bichar (Vichar) (faaa,
fewa)

Bidhata (Vidhata)
(furs, feuta)

: doubt; dissipation of compre-

: all-filling: brimful;

hension; that which causes
the perception to waver
faith; reliance

non-want-

ing

: enjoyment, participation: plea-

SANnce

: enjoyer; participant
: ghost; goblin; also an ele-

ment; state of matter

: reflection: idea

: maker of destinies (God); the

Bigasa (Vigasa) (faarr, :

fearn
Bij-mantara (dla-42a)

Bikhama (Vikhama)
(fawn, feu)

Bindu (fz)
Birda (Virda) (fazg,
faze)

Bismada (Vismada)
(famre, fen)

Bithal (alse)

Brahma (aH)
Brahma (an)
Brahmanda (gaz)

fixer of the lost
the flowering (of the soul);
aflorescence

: the three-line Gayatri whose

Y

study is permitted only to the
three higher castes; techni-
cally, the secret B ic
formula to the reception and
repetition of which only
higher castes are entitled;
the basic formula or premise
of a science

hard; tempestuous

: sperm; pure potentiality

i (i

.

royal title (ii) innate
nature (iif) Kingly prero-
gative and re | pretensions;
attributes of God

: sense of wonderment; term

specially coined by Guru
Nanak to express the peculiar
sense of the experience of the
Numenon

A non-incarnate form of
Vishnu specially worshipped
in Maharashtra

: Godhead

demiurge creator
the potential egg of the crea-
tion; Primeval Atom :

Brahmagyan(qay-famrs) : gnosis
: Wise of God; God-awakened;

Brahmagyani (qa-
faratal
Buddhi (aul)
Bujhanhara (qgaora
Buybna (se) )
Chakora (aa)
Chakvi (ae)

Chanana (ase)

-Chappu (gu)

gnostic

: higher intelligence (ef. sudhi,

intuition)

: the all-knower
: to know (ef. sujhna, to visua-

: the

Charandrbind, Charan-:

kamal (waaafda, aaa-
aHe)

lise)

i two birds of Indian

iterary convention t i

undivided love ypnyne

(Divine) light

the oars, spiritual aids

the lotus-feet; the effable
divine light that guides man-
kind either through the testa-
Char-padarath (33-
weg)

Chautha-pada (z@a-

ue)
Chihna (faaa)
Chinta (fia)
Chitta (fez)

Chitragupta
(faaa-auz)

Damodara (viva)

Dina (#3)
Dandaut (a2)
Daru (#3)
Darbar (waa)
Dargah (ez0ra)
Darsana (tan)
Dasa (==)
Dasam-Duara (@AH-
wora)

Dita (23).
pata (=) i
Datar &”

Deli (at a

Dharam (sn)

Dharam-Raja (daH-7'=)

Dharam-Rai (cen-afe)

Dharamsala (vars)

Dhatu (we
_ Dhiraja (dtea)
Dhola (¢m)
Dohagan (gaz)
Dhuri (cz)
Dhundukara (duara)

Dhuri (gsi)
Charan-Dhburi }

;
phyine (aon fone)

Page 388

[ iii ]

ment of the Guru, or b
Spiritual impulsion throug
consci¢nce wilhin

: the four life-objects according
to Hindu thought—Dharma,
Artha, Kama, Moksha

: the fourth state (Turiya), the
highest Bliss

: sign; characteristic

: care: anxiety; thought

: individual consciousness;
conscious mind, the ordinary,

lower mind, memory, etc.

: conscious, unconscious parts
(of the mind); two ministers
of the Dharmaraja who are
believed to record our deeds:
also, the indestructible store
of all memories and percep-
tions

: Krishna round whose waist is
the cord, .¢. God

: charity

: prostration (before the deity)

: the (Lord’s) Gate

: the (Lord's) Court

: the (Lord's) Abode

: vision

: slave; disciple

: the Tenth Door; the inmost

Self; the highest sense-organ
of the Hindu esoteric physio-
logy

: bounty, beneficence

; beneficent

: compassion

:-the body; also the self, the
owner of the bedy

: (1) the moral law; (2) the one
ultimate reality; (3) code of
conduct in life that sustains
the soul: (4) doctrine

} : Justiciar in the Lord's Court;
the Self; the discriminatory
spirit (within)

: the abode of Dharma; Sikh
temple of worship

: essence; also metal; Maya

: patience; fortitude

: beloved

: the deserted one by the lover

: from God, beginning

: the pristine nebulous state of
creation; also, darkness and
confusion

: Dust (of the Saint's feet) i.e.,
instruction in spiritual know-

ge ,

: contemplation; mental concen-

tration

Dibana (2s'z)
Dina (2a)

Dolana (Zee)
Duja (yr):
Dvaita (#23) \
Dui (eet)
Dukha (eu)

Dwaisha (22a)
Dyal (20s) i

Dyalu (eas)
Ekagara (aaa)

Gagana (wa)

Gana (mz)

Gandharva (sue) }

Gandharba (si0ea)
Gati (af)

Ghara; Nijghara (wa,

fama)
Ghata (we)

Ghata (we)
Girdhari (faaard))

Gupila (dvs)
Govardhana (&¢eus)

Guna (zz)

Gupta (aus)
Gurbani (aes)

Gurudwara (ma-eera)

Gurmati (aaxfa)
Gurmukh (ay)

the (Lord's) Court

supportless; (Arabic) religious
creed; Islamic creed

io «6owaver; wobble; swerve:
vascillate (in faith)

: the other; Maya

: dualism; duality;

sense .of
otherness; Maya
(spiritual) pain; affliction

‘aversion; repulsion

: compassionate

: of one mind; concentrated

ee

state of mind

Jit, the sky, also the layer of
individual mind which
touches and participates in
universal unconscious .

Shiva’s attendants

: the heavenly singers
: salvation; iit, reaching; arrival

*

: the earthen vessel:

’ Self; innerself

human

; ¥ .
: river-bank; sea-shore; destina-

tion

: the mountain-lifter; a name of

Krishna, who carried a
mountain on his hand; also,
God

: he who sustains the world;

oe

God
Krishna, the cow-tender: also
God

: attribute; mode; quality; also

of the three attribute-modes
of the universe according to
Sankhya philosophy

: subtle; secret; inner essence
: Guru's testament

: the Guru's abode;

also, a
Sikh temple of worship

: the Guru’s wisdom (way);

Sikhism

: Godwards turned (cf Man-

Gur-prasadi (qa unte) :

Guru (ag)

mukh, selfwards turned), also
through the Guru (geyfy) or
the Guru's Word; also, man
of religion
through the Guru's (God's)
Grace

: the spiritual teacher; enlighte-

ner. According to firm tradi-
tion, Guru Gobind Singh

' explained the meaning of the

word as follows: Gu means
inertia, nescience matter ; Ru_
means the principle which
Gyan (ara)

Hajar-Hajur (a2 oq)

Hazar-Hazur

Halemi-raj (sei a)

Halta-palta (aea-uea) :

Hari Goal )

Hatta, Hatti (de, det) :

How-main (78)

Hansa (cn)

Hirda, Rida (face, fre") :

Hiya (ater
Hukam (32x)

Indri (feet)

Ichha (fee")
Ira (Fes)

Ishta (ferz)

Ishwara (tinea)
Isnana (fensts)

Jagat (wa)

Jagdish (7aets)
Jala (at)

Jama (Yama) (3H, WH) :

Jam-duta (#423)

Jampuri (Yampuri)
(feudal, GHual)

Jana (a)

Janam-padarath (FaH- :
‘ wetdH)

lani-Iana (are}-w2)
Janjaéla (ws)

Page 389

[ iv ]

illuminates the mind. Guru
thus means the descent of
divine guidance to mankind
through a teacher or the
divine impulsion of human
conscience

2 gnosis, wisdom, cognition

. the living presence

: benign regime; a state and
government based on persua-
sion and not coercion

here and hereafter

: the destroyer (God)

shop, stall, store; the Guru's
or the Saint's abode to which
the seeker -repairs to buy his
spiritual wares

: Famnese; ego; sense of
aratencss
: es ical swan supposed to be

able to segregate milk from
water; hence, the discrimina-
ting mind; (2) one of the
incarnations of Vishnu

heart

: heart

God's Will, (God's) command

Sense-powers; there are two

kinds of them—five Jnanind-

riyas (or abstract knowing

senses) and five Karmindri-

yas (or abstract, working

senses) j

: the will or desire as set or
fixed by the will

: the nerve-current on the left

side of the spinal cord; the

left nostril; a nerve-passage

of energy in the Hindu

esoteric physiology

chosen ideal; also object of

worship

: the Supreme God

holy bath; ablution

ae

+ 8

: the world; is,
by transience

: master of the world; God

: Trap, snare (of Maya)

Angel of Death; fi,

cipliner

: Couriers of Death

: the abode of the Yama

characterised

the dis-

: the slave; disciple
life-object

: Inner-knower
: tumult (of senses)

Jantar (Yantar) (#22,
W338)

Japu (#4)

Jata (W3)

Jati (arg)

Jeraja (s+)

Jia-Dana (area)

Jiva (rite)
Jivatma (sean)
Joni (Yoni) (#f, dfs)

Jor (7a)
Joti (Afz)

Joti-Sar (afa-nqu)
Jost (ea)
Kacha (a)

Kaivalya(Kevela)(@¢s) :

Kala (as)
Kalyana (afeurs)
Kama (ax)
Kapata (az)

Kapra (auz)

Karamata (a3)
Karam (aaH)

Karan-Karana (aaa-
_ aa)

Karodha (au)

Karta (aes) \

Kartar (aes)

Karta-purukhu (za3t-

Kasauti (#421)
Kasumbhara (ange)

Kasturi (aagat)
Kathuri (#1)
Kateba (#39) :
Kavla, Kamla }
(@e", SHa")

Khaliq (wina)
Khanda (dz)
Khani (wi)

Khasmana (yawrar)
Khasama (47H)

: safflower;

; :

: a (magic) diagram; the spell

: prayer, meditation

: self-control

: caste; nature; Quality; species
: sperm-born

: the gift of spiritual life
Jivan-mukti (ales-Hazul) :

living freedom; emancipated
while yet alive

: individual soul (cf Purusha—

Universal Soul)

: Alman manifesting as Jiva;
the Self of an individual
: matrix; womb; source of
creation
power, also union
light (of the spirit); the

essence (of things)

: embodiment of (spiritual) light

the Way (of Release)

: unripe; transitory
alone; independent; isolated;
in Sankhya, the purified spirit
freed from all blending
colours
: time; also death

: freedom; redemption

lust; desire

: the sense-doors; in particular

highest sense of spiritual dis-
erimination

: cloth (body); raiment; robe of

honour

: miracle
: destiny; lot; law of cause and

effect in moral world; bind-
ing action; also Grace when
used in its Arabic sense

: cause of causes; the first

cause

: wrath
: Creator-Lord; Doer
: the Creator-Person

touchstone (used figuratively
for the Guru, ete.)

false colour (of the
seeming world)

musk: the inner-treasure of
spiritual revelation

: the semitic books of revelation

: the lotus ; Lakshmi, who lives

in the lotus

: the Creator of all creation
: portion ; part

: (four) sources of creation of
ancient Hindu sciences

: care

: husband ;
God

beloved spouse ;
Khilavanhara (freres-
aa)

Khuda (ye)

Khushi (st)

Kirat (faes)

Kirpa (Kripa) (fau')

Klesh (aaa)

Koti (set)

Kripa-nidhana (fqur-
fras

Kumbhaka (493)
Kar (z=)
Kushala (78)

Lada (=8)
Lakhana (Lakshana)

Buz)
Lal (8's) ©

Lekh (&)
Lekha (8)

Lila (st)
Liléta (fesre)

Liva (fez)

Lobha (83)

Loka (a) .
Linharami (#@-aaH})
Madhusidana (1aqza)
Mahal (Ha)

Mchala (xfae; sae")
Mahalla (Hae)

Mahiyala (Hila)
Majitha (HAs)

Page 390

: the (Lord's) palace ;
' - bride

[v]

: prompter (God)

: the Persian name for God

: gladness

: the wrought deeds

grace ; mercy

: afflictions

: acons

: the treasury or fount of grace

; the retention of breath (in the
Yogic practices of breath-

ing)
falsehood ; Maya
wholesome

i caressing _
3 mark ; characteristic

red (the colour of Spiritual
Bliss) ; also, beloved

the eternal writ :

account (of earthly activity) ;
reckoning (before God)

(God's) sport ; play ; pastime

: lot writ on the ‘forehead’
(conscience)

communion; absorption (in
devotional love)

greed, avarice

(three) worlds—heaven, earth
and the under-world ; (2) a
sphere

: faith-breaker ;one who betrays

God's bounties

; who as Krishna destroyed
Madhu, the demon

bridal chamber ; God's abode
(within and beyond)

also the

ae one

ae

: According to Sikh theological
tradition, it is a corruption
of the Sanskrit word ‘Mehla’
meaning a woman signifying
the human soul as Lord's
bride. But, accordig to
Dabistan - i- Mazahib by
Mohsin Fani, “itis an Indo-
Arabic word derived from
‘Haulatu’, (P/, Mahallati'n)
meaning one on whom the
Spirit of God has descended,
In Sikh scripture, ‘Mahalla*
meéans the prophet on whom
the spirit of God has descend-
ed, and through whom this
spirit speaks for the guidance
of the mankind”

: inter-s

: madder ; the fast colour (that
sticks to the soul

Mamta (sac)
Mandala (se)
Mangala (Hare)

Manmati (HsHfz)
Manmohan (Haas)
Manmukh (Hawa)

Mana (Manas) (Ha)
Mannana (z=)
Manohar (1873)

Mansa (Herr)

Maga, Marg (Hai, H'dal) +

Matha, Mastak
(Her, versa)

Mati (x31)

Mata (H3)

Maya (Hua)

Mera (its, 13)
Mitha (fits)
Moha (Ha)

eae

selfness
region

: the wedding song: the song of

- joy

: the counsel of self —
: the enticer of the mind ; God
: selfwards turned ; egocentric;

self-willed
mind

: to accept mentally

: the enticer of the mind,

iLé.,
Gad

: desire

the (spiritual) highway

lit, the forehead ; destiny or
God's Writ

: inebriated ; intoxicated
: intelligence

ose oe

Mokh-duara (fu-gurg) :
: obstinate ; pig-headed
: the Liberator ; (God)

: telease ; deliverance ; emanci-

Mirha (43)
Mukand (Hae)
Mukti (Moksha)
Mokh (ual, ty)

Mila (45)
Muni Ga, His)
Murari (Hers)
Murli Manohar

Mirti ')
Mushio Gree}

Nabhi (asl)
Nachhattar (s23a,
nda)

Nada (a2)

Nadri (zefa)
Nadri Nihala (sefe-

isara)

Nama (a) -
Naraka (saa)
Narayana (ante)

Nema (Niyama)

Nidhi (fafa)

delusion or that power of
nature which veils the-reality
and thus produces error and
illusion in our minds

the prime bead in the nosary

sweet (fig. Maya) ;

infatuation ; undue affection :
also, illusion

the Gate of Salvation

pation (from desire) ; it does

not imply release from

worldly activities in Sikhism
Tool, essence

: hermit, sage ; man of silence

on

wae o. one

oy

: hell ;

or

(zt) : seer
Krishna, the ayer of Mur,
the demon ; G
Krishna who entices with his
flute ; God
being ; also, idol
musk ; fragrance

navel
collection of stars

“subtle music such as the Yogi

hears in his trance ; sound
glance (of Grace)
beautitude of divine Grace

the Name; the Néumenon:
the inner-spirit of things
state of utter spiritual
unrest

the “human” God ; “mover on

the waters”, a title of Vishnu

; self-culture for inper-control ;

‘In Harth-Yoga, five Niyamas
are prescribed .
the treasure (of nine kinds)
Nigama (fsa)

Nihkevala (fsaees)

Niralama (faa)
Niranjana (fadaz)
Nirankira (fseara)
Nirbana, Nirvana
(faewz, faa)

Nirdhana (fsaca)
Nirbhau (faa?)
‘Nirguna (fseqe)

Nirmala (fsa)
Nirodha (fsa) -
Nirvaira (fsaéa
Nirvikalpa ( )
Nisana (slaz)
Nishana

Nivirti (fafzsst)

Nivli-Karma (fsest-
wax)

Onkira (Grae)
Oodha (@0)
Oodba-K.anval SS

Ota-pota (@s03)”

Pachhana (ume)
Pada, Padvi (uz, uel) :
Padam (wex)

Padarath. (versa)
Pahara (uaa)
Pahunara (ugz2")
Pakhana (uurs)

Palangha (weu)

. Pallara te
Paricha (va)

Panch-shabda (1ft)-
AAT

Pantha (ua)

Papa (utu)

Param-pada (vav-ug) -
Parasa (way),

Page 391

[ we]

: a treatise in which Shiva asks
and Parvati, his consort,
answers the questions (cf.

Agama)

: state of Kaivalya or complete
absorption in the thought of
universality

detached

immaculate ; spotless

the formless God ; absolute

cessation of desire. (It does
not imply non-being in
Sikhism)

sUpportless ; poor

fear-free

: absolute ; unrelated ; without
attributes or qualities

immaculate ; spotless

stopping -

: without enmity

: changeless

standard ; token ; pass-word
detachment ; “revolving away
from™

-

oom ose =s ee

inly washings in the Yogt

the One Supreme Being
inverted

: inverted lotus (i.e., mind
turned away from God)

: warp and woof

: realisation

state or condition
lotus ; symbol of purity and
spiritual awakening
life-object
: fit, smithy (the world)
: guest (ie. man in life)
: lif, stone (ignorant of spiritual
knowledge)
couch (intimacy with God)
husk
7 fit. five (2) glect, @). five
Inanindriyas and five Karm-
indriyas (see Indriya), (4) Five
desires--Kaima (lust) : Karo-
dha (wrath); Lobha {avarice);
Moha (infatuation) and
Ahankdra (ego)
: Jit. the melody of five sounds
(see Anhad-Shadha)
: the path (of spiritual realisa-
tion)
inequity ; in sin
seé Turiya ; final beatitude
: the philosopher's stone which
is supposed to turn eight
metals into gold ; the Guru

oo

oe

Paravara (utara)
Parbodha (a)
Parbrahma (waaay)

: extent
: Bnoss

: the

Parcha (Parichay) (uaa):

Parchanda (usu3)
Pargasa (wean)
Pargata (usaz)
Pargirami (urefaaut)
Parloka (waa)

Parimaratha (uaqa)

Parmatma (ueqsu')

trnscendent, Absolute
God
introduction (to spiritual veri-

ties)

: ablaze ; illumined

fh ee we ee

illumination

manifest

the (far-sighted) seer

the other world (of God's Pre-
sence)

: the highest truth ; the ultimate

realily

: the Over-soul ; God

Parameshwara (usu) :

Parupakara (we@uara)
Parpancha (uaa)
Parsada (ware)
Parvana (ude)
Partakha (ugg)
Pasara a

Patala (wae,

Patta (if)

Patita (ufsz3)

Pavittra (ufez)

Pinda (ts)

Pingala (fae)

Piru (fua)

Paja (yi)

Panji (at)

Pota (i3")
Prabhu (ys)
Pralabdha (uss)

Prana (uz)

Prapti (urust)
Pratapa (ystu)
Pravirti (yfzqat)

Premabhagti (brvafz)

Pret.
Prithvi Ce) at)

Priti (utsl)

Pukka ya
Puntta (usta)
Punna (ia)
Pirab-Janam (usa-

we eh Be om

the one God of gods (In Hindu
scriptures it often denotes
Shiva or Vishnu or Indra).

munificence

play

Brace ; beatitude

approved (by God)

directly perceivable

emanation ; the world of being

underworld

: honour

apostate ; the defiled
pure ; unstained (by Maya)
froth

: that which is gathered; i.e. :

oo

the body

the nerve-current on the right
side of the spinal cord accor-
ding to Hindu esoteric
physiology ; also the right
nostril

: husband (God)

: worship

capital-outlay ; the Name

: treasure ; or purse (mind)

o*

the powerful (God)

: karma whose fruits we have

begun to reap in this life
life-breath ; vital air (whose
seat is the heart and whose
movement is inwarrd)

: attainment

glory ; splendour

: “revolving towards” : involve-

ee

ment with the world

love worship (as opposed to
Hath-yoga or Karma-marga)
an carth-bound spirit

: the earth (also, the human

oe oe Fe TE ee

body)
love (of God)
solidly-buil ; firm
holy
Virtue

past birth

WH)
Pirab-karma (yda-agx) : past actions

Purak (uae)
Puri (ya)
Purkhotama (us83)

Purukha (Pursusha)
(uae, UgR)
Putli (use)

Qudrat (az73)
Qurbani (zeal)

Rabb (#3)
Raga (aa)
Raja-Yoga (wa-aa}

Rajas (aan)

Rakat-bindu (a@3-fa¢)

Ralialaé (Raliara)
(3ehre, gebrat) }

Rama (7H)

Ranga (da)

Rara (73)

Rasa (37)

Rasa (af)
Raza (a)
Razak (aa)
Rechaka (a3)
Rekha (a)
Ridhi (fafa)
Rupa (gu)
Ruti (afs)

Sabda (n8z)

Sacha Patshaha
(Fle ursirg)
Sadhana (nus)
Sadhu (rg; Au)
Saha (AW)
‘Saha (ava)

Sahja (nfzA)
Sahja-samadhi (rafa-
mfg)

Sahsa (mun)
Sakata (Aras)

Page 392

eee ee

[ vit ]

inhalation; inbreathing
spheres

the highest Person; the Per-
sonal God

: the Universal Mind or Soul

i puppel, Le., man

lit, nature; power
sacrifice as an offering to God;
dedication

: Arabic name for God
: attachment to sense-pleasures

: the Yoga

of _kingshi
mastery over the mi
highest Yoga

or

; the

: energy, activity, restlessness;

one of the three attribute-
modes of Sankhya philoso-
hy

P
: female ovary and male sperm

delightful

: the all-pervasive He

we te

ae

: P< <n

love; also colour

the tumult (of mind)

the capital-outlay; the capital
stock; the Name

“Pig essence; sweetness; love;

to) the Lord's
Will

: the sustainer: the bread-giver;
God

: exhalation, outbreathing

: sign, line or mark

: miraculous power

: form; phenomenon (cf. Name,

Neumenon)

: season (the timely opportunity)

the all-pervading eternal
Word; verbal testimony
which Mim4ns4 considers to
be the only Parmana (means)
to spiritual knowledge

: the true king (God)

discipline; also wife

: the disciplined one; the saint
: the Merchant; God

: the date of weddin

ee

fe, Union
with God or worldly death

poise; equipose; spontancous;
innate

: spontaneous trance

illusion
worshipper of Shakti; hence,
worshipper of Maya or Power

Sakhi (rr)
Samadhi (rHmul)
Samana (RH)
Samrasa (HHdA)
Samrath (rHaa)
Sanbhau (Swaymbhu)| ,
Saibhan (Ag, 73, 339)
Sangal (Ada)
Sanjama (Sanyama)
Aiwv, fo)

Sanjoga (sanyoge) 4 Aa:
Sankalapa (fresu)
Sansara (ra) *
Santokha (Santosha)
(re)

Sar (Ara)

Sarguna (nea)

Sarira (Ata)
Sarma (Rdx)

Sarupa(Swarupa) ( Mi
Sasivar (rota "=
Sassa (si)

Sastra (rrrg)

Sata Sacha (#3, Ha)

Sataka (Sattvika) (ga):
Satguru (nfzqa)

Sati (Hal)

Sat Sangat (nfs nas)

Saucha (3)
Seja (ar)

Seva (Fre
Sevaka (Hea)
Sharma (BH
Shakti (awal)

Shant (Shanti) (nfs)

Sharan (ras)
Shingar (ftiara)
Shardha (waar)
Sianapa (frerzu)

Siddha. (fia)
Siddhi (frict)

Sift-Salahu (frefarsrg)

Pa
: witness, also instruction

+ trance; super-consciousness
» to merge

: equality
: the all-pewerful 5
: self-existent ¥

: fellowship; society; sangha

: self-discipline; the mind's poise
which, according to Yoga,
proceeds through concentra-
tion and meditation to trance

Union with God

: mental impression

: that which flows, the world;

round of births and deaths

: contentment; pleasedness;
concord

: essence; also, iron, hence hard

: related; manifest: with
qualities

: human body

: humility; sense of shame:
introversion

one’s own true from or nature

: the moon; also region of peace

mother-in-law; the evil in us

six system of Hindu religious
thought

: existence; truth; verity; reality,
Le. that which is not transi-
tory or illusory; an attri-
bute of the Supreme

the illumination material

: the perfect (eternal) Guru, .e.,
God; the Guru as testament
(the Word)

: beneficent: ancient Hindu cus-
tom of the widow burning
herself on the pyre of her
husband

: society of the saints

: (holy) bathings; ablution

: couch; (God's) embrace; per-

‘feet union with God

: dedicated communal service

: servant (of God)

: effort

: goddess of power, female
aspect of the ultimate princi-
ple deified as Shiva’s wife

: peace; tranquility (of the
mind)

: refuge

: embelli:hments (i.e, merits)

: faith

: cleverness, (not wisdom);
shar’ vittedness

: the adept; Yogi .

: oceult™ powers (eighteen in
number); an accomplishment

: praise of God, or contemp-
Sikh (ffs)

Sila (Fits)

Simran. (fanaa)
Sirjanhara (frame)
Shiva (fre)

Sobha (Shobha) (F")
Socha (73)
Sohagan (Haas)

Soham (Fa)
Soham-Hansa (fi-dm") :
Sohild (fife)

Sucha (av)
Sudha (aur)
Sudhi (Rfa)
Sukha (au)
Sukhasana (Hw)
Sukham (Suksham

[ vill }

lating His attributes to
become His prototype.

: disciple; also, instruction
(fAfier) the man of culture
and religion

morality; moral’ habits, apti-
tudes or proclivities

: meditation

ae

we

ae ee

-

the Creator — _
one of the Hindu Trinity; for

’ Shaivites, the supreme Deity.

splendour

discursive thought-processes
(the Lord's) bride; the true
seeker

: Tam He

“Tam He, He is Me”
song of (Lord's) praise:
song sung at weddings

> pure

ae ee oe

nectar; (the Name)
consciousness; vision
happiness; peace

> the comfortable posture
:. subtle

(
Sukhmana (Suskmana) :

(Rana)

Sukhmani (quvsl)

Sukhopati (Sushupti)
(riufa, arufa)

: gem of peace;

the hollow canal which, accor-
ding to the esoteric Hindu
physiology, runs through
the centre of the spinal cord
that which

gives peace to the mind

: deep, dreamless sleep

Sunna-Samadhi(fs-nrl): (God's) primordial trance
: void, primordial

Sunna (Shunya) (fa)
Supna (Shupana) (mus) :
Sur (Surya) (3)
Suraga (Swarga) (waar)

Surati (Hafs)
Suta (Fa)
Svant (Fes)

Svasti (Renfa)
Sctaja (Svetaja) (Aax)

Tamasa (3A)
Tantra (33)

Tapa (Tapasa) (3u)
Tatt (33)

Tatt (Tattwa) (33)
Thakur (ee)
»Tiratha (sia9)

Trishna (fan3")

Page 393

the dream-state

: the sun; also, region of passion
: heaven (or the Fourth State);

Turiya

: consciousness
: the thread (of eternal laws)
: celestial drop from heavens

: greelin

which the Charrik (bird) seeks
be unto thee

: foetus-born

: darkness; inertia

the body of Hindu scriptures
revealed by Shiva

Penance; motrtification;
terity

aus-

: elements; also ‘that*

ae

ae

qUajniessence; principle; cate-
gory; truth; reality; thatness;
the thing-in-itself

the master

the holy: waters;"the (Hindu)

pilgrim-stations

craving, desire

Tulha (260)
Turiya (adler)

on

Udana (#23)

Udasa (fe")
Udasi (Gert)
Udyana (fea)

: the

: raft

the fourth State; the highest
State of Bliss of consciousness

one of the five vital airs of
inner body whose movement
is upwards

state of abandonment,
detachment or withdrawal

: the recluse; a Sikh order of

ascetic preachers

: the wasteland (i.e, world)

Uowsads {gary } : the state of ecstasy
‘Upaya (Guile) : means

Upadhi (Gua) : limiting adjunct
Utbhuja (@33a) : earth-born

Vada (==) : argumentative knowledge

Wahu-Gura (@9-@g) ot
Vairaga (2am)

Varbhanda(Brahmand) :
(waz, )
Varana (waz)
Vasand (e7")
Vedana (22a)

Vesa (2A)
Ve-pravaha (zea) :
Vichara (fewa)
Vichola (fete)
Vidana (fez) :
Vijoga (Viyoga) (fea,
(feua)

Vikalpa (fea)

Vikara (frara) :
Vikhama (faux)
Viveka (Babeka) (Ieee, :

Vritti (Britti) (feast)

4

Vyaha (fara)
Yoga (Joga) (sa, Wa)
Yuga (Juga) (ga, am):

: verbal

: “the whirlpool”,

the Sikh name for God
dispassion; detachment; in-
difference to the unreal; non-
attachment; uncelouredness
the universe

: colour or caste
: habit-energy
: feeling; - sensation;

the inner
pain (of divine love)

: westure; raiment; decoration

care-free

idea-forms

intercessor (the Guru)
wonderment

: separateness

delusion;
notion; fancy
mortal sins

: treacherous; hard
sense of discrimination bet-
ween the real and the unreal

wave-form

doubt;

in the Chitta

. wedding; (Union with God)

: joining: spiritual culture that

leads us to God

onc of the four ages of the
world—(1)Satyuga, (2) Treta,
(3) Duapar, (4) Kali. The
four Yugas have a total of
4,320,000 man-years as their
age, the Satyuga having the
longest and the Kaliyuga, the
present one, the shortest

in which man has declined :

spiritually and morall
even physically to the
depths.

sach khand is The Abode of Truth.

Chapter 2 - A brief outline of
Fundamentals of Sikhism

Chapter 1

Introduction

Background - Confuse al Stake ai Mind,

A SR 4 ld
de. Afterits-elimax, Buddhism started degenerating in India. Statues of
Buddha and Budhisattvas became very common and were installed in
their temples.- Buddhist monks preached lesson of non-violence and non-

resistance which made the people nonaggressive even in self defence. dc ee

CAMA ae
Le teye Phd ea
2 When Buddhism was driven out of India, the Hindu society set up
their own\gods and-goddesses and began to worship their stone images.
The Hindu priests who had been for centuries, the self-made custodians of
religion and its teachings, had reduced the religion to a mockery
performing rites and rituals and superstitious ceremonies devoid of any
sense and meaning. Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, a_philosopher and former
President of India wrote “The Hindu leaders neglected to their own gods
and Cyoddesses and began to worship their stone superstitions and
materialism. Religion became confused with casté distinction and taboos

about eating and drinking... oe S Roda Rprthaar d wiclend

Ag te jel

“3. , The Hindu. society was over-ridden with caste system. The religion
became the privilege only of the upper class called the Brahmans. The
sacred religious books were neither accessible to the other classes nor
could the people understand them because they were written mostly in
Sanskrit, a language not spoken by the masses. Religious reading, writing
and teaching was strictly the monopoly of the Brahmans, The lowest of
the lowest class was called the Untouchables. A touch or even a shadow

of these untouchables seemed to pollute the higher classes.

— Such was the condition of #timetu India when Muslim invaders from
the west began pouring. in large numbers one after the other. For the
Muslim invaders, from Mahmood of Gazni in the eleventh century to the
Moghuls in the sixteenth century (at the time of Guru Nanak), the Punjab
was always the gateway of India. All these Muslim invaders massacred
men, women and children without mercy, plundered their homes,
desecrated and demolished their temples and robbed the wealth of these
temples, The Hindus were converted to Islam at the point of the sword,
Nobles, scholars, sufies, poets and philosophers who also came along with
these invaders, settled in the various parts of India, and they laid the
foundation of. Indo-Muslim culture in the country,

Guru Nanak was born in 1469 at Rai Bhoeki Talwandi now Known as
Nankana Sahib situated in Punjab province of West Pakistan. This place is
about 55 miles north-west of Lahore. His father, Mehta Kalu was a
‘patwari’ - an accountant of land revenue in the government. | Guru's
mother was-Mata Tripta and he had one older sister, Bibi Nanki.\ Led bd

Guru Nanak Dev saw Ye world suffering out of hatred, fanaticism,
falsehood and hypocrisy, The world had sunk in wickedness and sin. So
he Set out Tor the regeneration of humanity on this earth. He carried the
torch of truth, heavenly love,peace and joy for mankind. He embarked on
his Divine Mission: and went towards east, west, north and south and
visited various centers of Hindus, Mustims, Buddhists, Jainis, Sufis, Yogis
and Sidhas. He met people of different religions, tribes, cultures and
races. He travelled on foot with his Muslim companion named Mardana, a
minstrel. His travels are called Udasis.

; LY
7 Guru Nanak never asked a Muslim or a Hindu to become his discipie
to get a place in heaven after death. He told the Muslim to become a true
Muslim-and to a Hindu to becom a true Hindu in order to get salvation.

Or

g. After the third and the last Udasi the Guru returned to Kartarpur.
He travelled all over to preach the gospel of Nam and communicating new
awakening in the people's mind to realize Truth. In order that his work
should last, he established a network of centers which were called Manjis,
side by side with the centers of all other faiths. When he finished his long
travels, he settled down at Kartarpur for the rest of about twenty_years of
his life. He knew that unless he centralized the activities of his new faith,
he could not expect, jt to survive. There were now Sikh centers all over
India, Ceylon, Tibet and the Middle East. No founder of any religion had
built such a vast organization, breaking all provincial, national,
international and cultural barriers, during his life time. When he went
abroad on his missionary tours, he put up the robes of religious orders of
the holy places he: visited. Holiness in those places was inseparable from
the holy garbs. When he came back to Kartarpur, he doffed his pilgrim's
dress, and wore worldly garments in order to show that he. did not desire

his followers to devote themselves to an ascetic life, At the same time he
sat on his religious throne, and started preaching to the people.

Guru_at kartarpur and foundation of Sikh religion

Formation of sangat LAA M4
9. First he formed the Holy Communion which was called Sangat, and

the place where the Holy Communion was held called Gurdwara (House of
the Guru). Emphasis was laid on religious instructions and strict discipline.

The Japji was recited at the ambrosial hour of the morning, the Sodar
(Rehras) in the evening and Kirtan Sohila at night before going to bed.
Divine measures (Kirtan) were sung in his presence in the morning as
well as in the evening.

Regular religious instructions were imparted by the Guru. Such
instructions could be given to the individual followers and alsa in the
regular gathering. The emphasis was laid on the greatness of God, upon
His gracious self-revelation, upon the perils of human condition, and upon
the paramount necessity of meditation on Divine Name. Those who took
pride in their status of caste or wealth, would be sternly admonished, and
anyone who depended on religious hypocrisy would be soundly
condemned. The Guru enunciated an integral view of the spiritual and
moral life and those who imbibed it, tried to realize its essence in their
own daily conduct. The Guru's teachings emphasized on two things in
particular;!'against limiting of the spiritual and moral c
actions, ard against confining the moral action fo the indi
on the people and many of them embraced his religion. Bhai Buddha,
Bhai Lehna (later Guru Angad),Taru Poput, Prithi, Kheda, Ajita Randhawa,
Sheikh Mallo and Ubre Khan are some of the examples of conversions at
first sight to the faith of the Guru.

i’. Emphasis was laid on honest hard tabor for living. Asceticism was
explicitly rejected_and. instead.a.d isciplined.worldliness..and.- familylife.was
set_forth_as.the..proper. course..for..the believer, Earnest living through
honest hard labor and then out of that hard earned money, giving in the
name of the Lord, was the moral way to bring up the family. The Guru
himself set up this example by working with his hands in the fields for the
remaining about 18 to 20 years of his life at Kartarpur,

Common free kitchen- Guru ka Langar . ® th, M

4%. Every one worked for his living and gave a part of his earning for

the free kitchen called Guru ka Langar. All people, the Brahman or the

Sudra, the king or the commoner, the Muslim or the Hindu, had to sit in
the same row and eat the same food.

Composition and collection of bani 5th Mw,

: }
13. These were the years when most of the Guru's disciples received
religious instructions from him and who recorded what they received,
Many devotees, it is said, copied the daily prayers and hymns. These
collections were cailed 'Bani Pothis'(books of hymns). The Bani Pothi
compiled during his life time was passed on to the’ second Guru, Guru
Angad Dev,

; Nd

The remaining nine Gurus

14. 2° Guru - GURU ANGAD DEV(1504 - 1552, Guruship 1539 -
1552).

Guru Angad Dev was born on March 31, 1504 in a village called
Harike in Ferozepur district of the Punjab. His father, Bhai Pheru was a
trader. His parents called him Lehna. He was married at the age of
fifteen. His wife, Khivi was a native of Mattei di Sarai in Ferozepur district.
His father grew weary of Harike and with his family returned to his
ancestral place, Mattei di Sarai and lived there. Bhai Lehna's wife gave
birth to two daughters, Amro and Anokhi, and two sons called Dasu and
Datu.

15. 3 Guru- GURU AMAR DAS (1479 - 1574, Guruship 1552 -
1574).

Guru Amar Das was born on April 5, 1479 at Basarka village in
Amritsar district. He was the eldest son of his parents, Bhai Tej Bhan and
Mata Lakhmi. At the age of 24, he was married to Mansa Devi who gave
birth to two sons, Mohan and Mohri, and two daughters, Bibi Dani and
Bibi Bhani.

i6. 4" Guru - GURU RAM DAS (1534 - 1581, Guruship 1574 —-
i581).

Guru Ram Das was the son in law of Guru Amar Das and worked in
the community kitchen run by Guru Amar Das. He was married to Bibi
Bhani and was known by the name of Jethaji prior to the Guruship. Akbar
granted the land to Guru Ram Das on which he founded the city of
Ramdaspur (later known as Amritsar).Emperor Akbar came to Goindwal
and he dined with the common people in the Guru's langar before he
could see the Guru. Emperor granted the estate in the name of Bibi Bhani
at that time, and Jethaji being her husband, was made incharge of the
estate by Guru Amar Das.

17. 5‘ Guru - GURU ARJAN DEV (1563 - 1606, Guruship 1581-
1606). ,

Guru Arjan was born in Goindwal, a small town in Amritsar district,
on April 15, 1563. He was the youngest son of Guru Ram Das and Bibi
Bhani. As a child, one day he found his way to the bed of Guru Amar Das
who was then resting. His mother ran to fetch the child before he could
disturb the Guru, but he had already awakened the Guru, who revealed,
“et him come to me; ‘yeh mera dohita bani ka bohita howega'’- this
grandson of mine shall be a ship to take mankind across the ocean of the
world.” Guru Arjan was married to Ganga, daughter of Krishen Chand, a
resident of Meo village near Phillor in Jullundhur district. The marriage

a aa ge
f

a

took place in 1589 when he was about 26 years old. Guru Ram Das began
excavation of two tanks named Santokhsar and Amritsar and started the
foundation of the city of Ramdaspur. After his father, Guru Arjan applied
himself to the task of completing the tanks and extending the city. Guru
Arjan, created an ocean in which all rivers and rivulets could fall and
assume the appearance of the ocean itself. The composition of such an
ocean was completed on Bhadon Vadi i, Sambat 1661 (1604 A.D.) and
was called Adi Granth. It was by no means a bible for the Sikhs alone, but
it is universal in character. It contained no life story of the Gurus but only
the Universal Truth, each and every word of which was dedicated to the
Glory of the Almighty Ged only. ; Hh

18. 6 Guru - GURU HAR GOBIND (1595 - 1644, Guruship
1606- 1644).

Guru Har Gobind was born to Guru Arjan Dev on June 19, 1595 at
Wadali, a village near Amritsar. The Guru had five sons and one daughter.
They were: -

(a) Baba Gurditta was born to Mata Damodri in 1613.

(b) Bibi Viro was born to Mata Damodri in 1615.

(c) Baba Surj Ma! was born to Mata Marwahi in i617.

(d) Baba Ani Rai was born to Mata Nanaki in 1618.

(e) Baba Atal Rai was born to Mata Nanaki in 1619.

(f) Baba Tegh Bahadur was born to Mata Nanaki in 1621.

19. 7'* Guru - GURU HAR RAI (1630 - 1661, Guruship 1644-
1661).

Guru Har Gobind had five sons and one daughter. The eldest son
was Baba Gurditta who had two sons, Dhir Mal and Har Rai. Dhir Mal
turned out disloyal and disobedient. He had some influence in the court of
Emperor Aurangzeb and was in communication with the Guru's enemies.
When Guru Har Gobind moved to Kiratpur, Dhir Mal with his mother,
remained at Kartarpur and took possession of the Guru's property and
also of the priceless original copy of the Adi Granth. He thought that as
long as he had its possession, the Sikhs would look upon him as their
religious leader and thus Dhir Mal refused Guru's invitation to come to
Kiratpur on his father's: death. Guru Har Gobind nominated Har Rai,
younger brother of Dhir Mal, as his successor before he departed fer the
heavenly abode on March 3, 1644.

20. 8 Guru - GURU HAR KISHEN (1656 - 1664, Guruship
1661- 1664).

Guru Har Kishen who was the second and the youngest son of Guru
Har Rai and Mata Krishen Kaur, was born on 7th of July, 1656 at Kiratpur.
Guru Har Kishen was appointed Guru when he was five years and three
months old. Guru Har Kishen died at a very young age suffering from

Me

Fi

SI}

LY

; €reation of the khalsa

small pox while trying to help out poor people already suffering from the
disease in the city of Delhi. While dying he pointed out his successor as
being in the village of Bakala.

21. 9 Guru -GURU TEG BAHADUR (1621 - 1675, Guruship
1664 1675).

Guru Tegh Bahadur was the fifth and the youngest son of Guru Har
Gobind and was born on first of April, 1621 to Mata Nanaki at Amritsar,
Guru ke Mahal. He was married to Mata Gujri, daughter of Lai Chand of
Kartarpur in Jullundhur district. After Guru Har Gobind, he with his
mother, Mata Nanaki and his wife went to live in Bakala. c >)

22. 10 Guru - GURU GOBIND SINGH (1666 - 1708, Guruship
1675-1708).

Guru Gobind Singh was born on the seventh day of the light half of
the month of Poh, Sambat 1723 (December 26, 1666) at Patna. Guru Teg
Bahadur had directed his wife to name the child as Gobind Rai, who would
be born in his absence. He wrote a letter of thanks to the Sikh Sangat of
Patna for looking after his family. After martyrdom of Guru Teg Bhadur in
Delhi, Guru Gobind Singh was named the 10th Guru in 1675.

np RE EEA

a

*

23. Guru Gobind Singh sent Hukamnamas to his followers all over the
country to visit Anandpur at the Baisakhi festival to be held in Sambat
1756 (1699 A.D.). It seemed as if the whole of Punjab was on the move;
and they came from all parts of the country: A small ‘tent was pitched en
a small hill now called Kesgarh Sahib at Anandpur and an open air dewan
(assembly) was-held. The Guru drew his sword and in a thundering voice
said, “ I want one head, is there anyone who can offer me?” This most
unusual call caused some terror in the gathering and the people were
stunned, There was dead silence. The Guru made a second call. Nobody
came forward. There was still more silence. On the third call there rose
Daya Ram, a khatri of Lahore,who said, “ O true king, my head is at thy

service." The Guru took Da 4 Ram, by the arm and led him inside the.

tent. Ablow and thud were heard. Then the Guru, with his sword dripping
with blood, came out and said, “ I want another head, is there anyone
who can offer?"

2A" Again on third call Dharam Das, a Jat from Delhi came forward and
said, “ O true king! My head is at thy disposal." The Guru took Dharam
Das inside the tent, again a blow and thud were heard, and he came out
with his sword dripping with blood and repeated, “ I want another head, is
there any beloved Sikh who can offer ite"

8 a Eh Ky
He then ordained them to do the following: -

(a) First they must wear the following articles whose names begin
with 'K’:-

; (i) Kes. Unshorn hair. ‘This represents the natural
} appearance of saintlinood.This is the first token of Sikh faith.

(ij) Kanga. A comb to clean the hair.
(iii) Kachha. An underwear to denote chastity.

i (iv) Kara. A steel bracelet on the wrist, a symbol of
dedication to the Divine Bridegroom.

-(v) Kirpan. A sword for self-defence and a symbol of
dignity, power and unconquerable spirit.

pi) They must observe the following guidelines: -
(i) Not to remove hair from the body.
(ii) Not to use Tobacco or other intoxicants.

a

Y (iii) Not to eat ‘Kutha', a meat of an animal slaughtered by
w slow degrees as done by the Muslims.
(iv) Not to commit adultery- 'Par nari ki sej, bhul supne hun
na jayo' (never enjoy, even in dream, the bed of a woman
other than your own wife) (A supplementary ordinance was
issued that anyone who did not observe any of the four
directives, must be re- baptized, pay a fine, and promise not
to offend anymore; or he must be excommunicated from the
Khalsa). i

gt eR Ta reat Gt se

(c) They must rise at dawn, bathe, meditate on Gurmantar-
'Waheguru', Moofmantar- the preamble of Japji, and recite five
panis- Japji, Jap Sahib.and Swayas in the morning; Rehras in the
evening; and Kirtan Sohela at bed time at night.

(d) They must not have matrimonial relations with smokers, with
persons who killed their daughters, with the descendants or
followers of Prithi Chand, Dhir Mal, Ram Rai, or masands who had
strayed away from the tenets and principles of Guru Nanak.

Qx.4 Khatris Stood up and accepted thé Fé
wn insisted that they Would Never accept any rai

(e) They rust not worship idols, cemeteries, or cremation
grounds, and must believe only in One Immortal God. The Gury

deem themselves all brothers of one family. Sikhs were to
intermarry among themselves. \

30. When the Guru addressed the gathering, several B ahmans and
ligion of Guru’ While others
] ny as Opposed to

the teachings of the Vedas and § hastras.
31. So far the leadership had remained in the hands of non- militant
urban Khatris from whom the majority of the masands were drawn, but
now the situation had completely changed, Peasantry and other classes of
rural areas formed the bulk of the converts. Even those people who had

ensure firm coherence and commitment on their Part to the holy and lofty
ideals of Sikhism. ;

33. With the creation of the Khalsa, some new doctrines were also
established. The first doctrine of the Khalsa was the doctrine of the
theocratic democracy by his selected, not elected, five representatives of
the people from amongst the thousands of the devotees from all over the
country while seconde was the doctrine of collective responsibility by
authorizing the Five Beloved Ones only, in the presence of the holy Guru

Granth Sahib to assume authority implicitly to be obeyed by the whole

nation. Vw
vs

10

Chapter 2

A brief outline of Fundamentals of Sikhism

#. The.seed for the reformation of humanity which was sown by Guru
Nanak and watered by his successors, ripened in the time of Guru Gobind
Singh and culminated in the creation of the Khalsa. The sword that carved
the Khalsa’s way to sublime glory was undoubtedly forged by Guru
Gobind Singh but its steel was provided by Guru Nanak. The whole
programmet Guru Nanak's initiation reached its exalted state of finality
when the tenth Nanak (Guru Gobind Singh) passed on ‘Gur Nanak Jot’ to
the Adi Granth, Holy Scripture- par excellence, and proclaimed it as Guru

Granth Sahib, the last Guru forever.

q, From the moment of its initiation by Guru Nanak to its consecration
by the tenth Master, Guru Gobind Singh, 4 period of 239 years, Sikhism
acquired its holy scripture, signs and symbols, and unmistakable form oF
stance. Transformation from one Guru to the other happened in the same
way as one lamp was to lit from another. The holy transformation of ten
Gurus is recognized as ONE, since all of them. came from the same Divine
Flame in continuity of the same Divine Mission. The establishment of
Guruship, the story of succession, the founding of Amritsar and other
seats of Sikhism, the compilation of the Adi Granth, the institution of
Sangat - (holy congregation) and Pangat (Guru's free kitchen), the
martyrdom of the Gurus, the panoply and plumage of power, the
investiture of the Khalsa, all these. and many other events which make
the Sikh chronicle, give Sikh religion a color of the highest distinction.

3. In Sikhism, Guruship does not stand for mere order of mystics,
since the Guru attached no values to renunciation of worldly life. Those
who practiced renunciation such as Yogis and Sidhas were condemned as
shirkers of responsibilities- they were considered as escapists and
runaways from social responsibilities and obligations. In Sikhism a man is
called upon to accept the Will of God and thus sublimate his suffering and
loss. Sikhism believing in the conquest of sorrow -and suffering, stipulates
ceaseless endeavor.

Purpose of life

a. According to the Guru, moral life is not a matter of a few
commandments OF a code or a ritual, but the fruit of a life directed
towards spiritual quest involving incredibly hard discipline. Most people
generally believe in enjoying materialistic life to the brim. Thus, the life
goes on till a person ultimately finds oneself physically spent up and
spiritually bankrupt. Lured by the charm of success in this materialistic
world, one gives little or No thought to the Eternal values of life.

A. The purpose of human fife in Sikhism is not to attain paradise or
Swarga of the Popular Hindu conception, but to seek God, and be united

mate goal
Soul and then enjoy the Uninterrupted Bliss forever. A Sikh aspires for
Spiritual union with the Lord- a state of Bliss. Human life is an Opportunity

to attain that goal, if it is missed, a person falis back in the cycle of birth
and rebirth,

Concept of God in Sikhism

ff. The definition of God is given in the very Opening sentence of Guru
Granth Sahib, which is called Mool-Mantar (Preamble of Japji):-

There is but One God

He is the Eternaj Truth.

The Creator, All-Pervading Divine Spirit
Unfearful, Without hate and enmity

Immortal Entity, Unborn, Self-Existent, and
He is realized by His Own Grace,

Meditate upon

Who was True before the Creation

Who was True in the beginning of the Creation
Who is True now, and

O Nanak, Who Shall be True for Ever.

12

B- As a matter of fact the whole of Guru Granth Sahib is the
explanation of the above definition, The Guru elaborates the concept of
God in Rag Sorath:-

The Unseen, Infinite, Inaccessible, Inapprehensible God is
not subject to death or destiny.

He is of no caste, unborn, self-existent, without fear or
doubt.

I ama sacrifice to the Truest of the true.

He hath no form, or color, or outline;

He becometh manifest by the true Word.

He hath no mother, father, son, or kinsman;

He feeleth not lust, and hath no wife

Or family; He is pure, endless, and infinite; all light is Thine,
O Lord.

God is concealed in every heart; His light is in every heart.

He whose understanding's adamantine doors are opened by
the Guru's instruction, fixeth his gaze on the Fearless One.

God having created animals made them subject to death, and
retained all contrivances in His Own power.

He who serveth the True Guru obtaineth the real boon, and is
delivered by repeating the Word.

Truth is contained in pure vessels; few there are whose acts
are pure.

By seeking Thy protection, saith Nanak, the soul blendeth
with the Supreme Soul.

(Sorath Mohalla 1, p-597)

g, God is both Impersonal (Nirgun) and Personal (Sargun). Impersonal
God is formless arid beyond the human reach. When He reveals Himself
through His Creation, He becomes related and personal. It is just like the
rays coming out of the sun. The source Is Formless, and the whole
universe is His Personal form. No form howsoever unique it may be, is
independent of Him. Infinite can manifest into unlimited number of finites,

Infinite. So any finite orm cannot be worshipped as God, Who is infinite
and formless: -

“God is Formless, colorless, markless,
He is casteless, classless, creedless;
His form, hue, shape and garb
~~ Cannot be described by any one,
He is the Spirit of Eternity,
Self-Radiant, He shineth in His Splendor.”
(Guru Gobind Singh)
44, God neither takes birth nor does He die:-
"Burnt be the tongue that says
The Lord takes birth and undergoes death,"
(Bhairon Mohalla 5, p-1136)

4f" The Guru warned that he was not God, and those who called him
God, should fall into hel|:-

"Whosoever calleth me God
May fall into hell,"
(Guru Gobind Singh)

14

'As you. SOW, SO shail you reap’, leads to the theory of ‘Karma’,
actions, good or pad, where a person is rewarded for nis good actions and
punished for his bad deeds. Therefore, according to the theory of Karma,
a worst sinner will always suffer for bis deeds and can never attain
salvation. Guru Nanak has rejected this stating that pardoning even the
worst sinner is the Sovereign Characteristic (Birdh) of God:~-

"patat pavan prabh birdh tumaro”
(Bilawal Mohaila 5, p-829)

‘Redeeming the repentant sinner, is Thy Characteristic.’
(Translation of the above)

14. The Guru emphasizes that the sinner whom no body affords
protection in the whole world, if he surrenders before the Almighty,
becomes pure, that is he is blessed by His Grace:-

"Jigs papi kau milai na dhoee

Saran aawai ta nirmal hoee."
(Bhairon Mohalla 5, p-1141)

‘The sinner who is patroniess in the world

When surrenders before God, gets deliverance.’
(Translation of the above)

aoe The Guru reiterates that to save the saints, to protect the righteous,
and even to redeem the repentant sinners is Paramount Characteristic of
God.

Concept of Nam (Divine Name) .

16. According to Gurmat (Guru's teaching), before the creation, God
lived absolutely by Himself, Formless. When He made Himself manifest,
He first formed Himself into NAM (Divine Name) and then created Nature.
After creating Nature, He did not go away from it, rather He sustained His
creation with His Own presence into it, and felt delighted.

"Aapinai aap sajio aapinai rachio Nao
Dui kudrat sajiai kar asan ditho chao."
(Asa Mohalla 1- pauri 1, p-463)

"God created Himself and assumed Name
Second besides Himself He created Nature
Seated in Nature He watches with delight what He creates."

(Translation of the above)

3

oar

a a 2g

15

47. NAM (Divine Name) and God are not two different entities. Nam is
just another aspect of the Almighty, still Formiess. Nam is the total
expression of all that God is. Nam sustains everything:-

“Nam sustains and controls all beings

Nam supports the universe and its regions."
(Gauri Sukhmani Mohalla 3, 16-5, p-284)

"Tav sarb nam kathai kavan

Karm nam barnat sumat,"
(Guru Gobind Singh- Jap Sahib)

#G. God may be called by countless names by the devotees, who create
these names according to the attributes of their Godhead, but the first
and the foremost name of God js clearly depicted as 'SAT' (Eterna! Truth)
which shows the ever-existence of God:-

v

"Kirtam nam kathai terei jihba

Satnam tera pra purbla,"
(Maru Mohalla 5, p-1083)

2 The word NAM is a mystic Word used in practical religious life and in
discipline of meditation. God is remembered by His attributive names.

has of the Divine Being. Such a mystic Word in Sikh religion is called
‘Waheguru' or Wonderful God or ‘Thou art Wonderful’; True Name is not
the word by which we describe an object, but the tota! power, quality and
character of Reality, Through the word 'Waheguru' the prophet has tried
to sum up mystic power and experience of His presence all around,
Prophets have given us Divine Names of the nameless God, which reflect
His presence in our consciousness, Contemplation or meditation on true

Name (Waheguru) is called Practicing the presence of God in one's
conscious,

21. Gurbani (Divine Word) itself is NAM.
(a) Gurbani itself is Nam:-

“Gurmukh bani nam hai, nam ridai vasaie."
(Sarang ki Var-pauri, p-1239)
16

(b) The term 'Nam Japo' means to remember God and to invoke
His presence in one's conscious. All modes of meditation take the
devotee into the presence of God, but according to Gurbani, Hari
Kirtan, the musical recitation of Gurbani, is the super form of

meditation. It invokes one's consciousness to the maximum level,
into the presence of God:-

“Har kirat utam Nam hai vich kaljug karni sar."
(Kanre ki Var Mohalta 4, p-1314)

(c) The Gurmat explains that the recitation of the word ‘Har
Har..." is Nam Japna:-

“Har har har har nam hai gurmukh pavai koei."
(Kanre ki Var Mohalla 4, p~1313)

pete
y

oN
7 (d),/ Salvation cannot be attained without Nam. In other words
eo, eatiything that delivers salvation is Nam. Since Gurbani delivers
5 salvation, therefore, Gurbani is Nam:~-

fi

"Sachi bani mithi amritdhar

Jinh piti tis mokhdwar.”
(Malar Mohaila 1, p-1275)

"The True Bani is sweet-nectar

Whosoever is devoted to it, attaineth salvation."
(Translation of the above)

"Sachi bani sion dhare piyar

Tako pavai mokhdwar." |
(Dhanasari Mohalla 1, p-661)

Whosoever devoted to Eternal Bani

Will get deliverance."
(Translation of the above)

2%, It is therefore, very clear and evident that any.form of recitation of
Gurbani, may be simple reading with attention and devotion or meditation
on any Sabad of Gurbani or Kirtan of Gurbani, is fully deemed as Nam

Japna (meditation on Nam), that is to invoke the presence of God ih one's
conscious,

It may be mentioned here that there are small sects who mislead
the innocent Sikhs on the subject of Gurbani and Nam. These sect ieaders
very emphatically say to the innocent Sikhs," Gurbani says that one must
meditate on Nam, but Gurbani is not Nam. Come on, we will give you
Nam." Then they whisper in their-ears some broken sentence of Gurbani
which they call Nam, and warn them not to tell anyone; if ever they
disclose this Nam to any one, some curse will fall on them. In this way
they run their cults (shops). Thus, innocent Sikhs and others are lured
and misled into their fold. The Sikhs should, therefore, be very careful
from such sects. Those who try to say that Gurbani is not Nam, they are
either misguided or are deceitful. According to Gurmat (Guru's teaching),
Gurbani is everything:-

(a) Gurbani is Nam:-

“Gurmukh bani Nam hai.."
(Sarang ki Var-pauri, p-1239)

(b) Gurbani is Guru:-

“Bani Guru, Guru hai Bani..."
(Nat Mohalla 4, p-982)

(c) Gurbani is Nirankar:-
“Wauh wauh bani nirankar hai

Tis jiwad avar na koi."
(Slok Mohalla 3, p-515)

‘Wauh wauh Bani is the Formless One

There is none as great as He."
(Translation of the above)

(d} Gurbani is every Nad and Ved:-
“Sabh nad beid gurbani

Man rata sarang pani."
(Ramkli Mohalla 1, p-879)

18

w. It is, therefore, Nam. that ultimately leads a person to Eternal Bliss.
For God consciousness, one must come in contact with Nam, but without
Guru one cannot attain Nam and would wander away in the darkness.

"Were a hundred moons to appear
’ Were a thousand suns to arise
There would still be utter darkness

If there were no Guru.” -
(Asa di Var, Mohalla 2, p-463)

“Let no one in the world remain in doubt

That it could ever be possible to be saved without the Guru.”
(Gaund Mohalla 5, p-864)

"In this age of falsehood, Nam lieth hidden
Though the Lord filleth all hearts,

The Jewel of Nam becomes manifest in the hearts of only
those .

Who resort to the Guru's refuge."
(Parbhati Mohalla 3, p-1334)

“All repeat God's Name, yet He is not attained
But when through the Grace of the Guru
God comes to reside in the mind

It is only then one's life becomes fruitful."
(Gujri Mohalla 3, p-491)

Concept of Guru

28. A yogi asked Guru Nanak who his Guru was? He replied, "The Word
is Guru." Ged anointed Guru Nanak with His Word, His Wisdom (Logos),
and the Guru's whole personality was Word-personified. The Guru made it
very clear that his human body was not the Guru, and the mere outward
glimpse of the Guru, or the outward profession of faith in him, could not
bring the disciple close to the Guru. The light of the Word within his heart
was the real Guru and the disciple should approach him with a receptive
mind to receive His Light.

Baptism in Sikhism

26. Nam is the whole source which takes a person back into the
Unmanifest One. Guru is the sole Channel to Nam. The Gurmat tells us
that the Jewel of Nam becomes manifest in the hearts of only those who
resort to Guru's refuge.

27, How do we resort to Guru's refuge? When we go to the Guru,
he gives us Nam and then we meditate upon the Guru given Nam which
in turn takes us back to our destination, the Almighty.

28. How do we go to the Guru? In Sikhism the one and the only
one way to go to the Guru is through Baptism. A Sikh has to take Pauhail
or Amrit, from the Five Beloved Ones (Panj Pyare), then he becomes of
the Guru or Guruwala. Without baptism a Sikh remains without Guru or
Nigura.

“Nigure ka hai nau bura."
(Rag Asa Mohalla 3 Pati, p-435)

29. Everybody repeats God's Name, but simply repeating it He is not
attained. When through the Grace of the Guru, Nam enshrines the mind,
only then one's efforts of meditation become fruitful. Without the Grace of
the Guru, a Sikh cannot attain his objective of salvation. In order to seek
the Guru's Grace, we have to go to the Guru and that is only done
through baptism.

“Ram Ram sabh ko kahai kahiai ram na hoi

Gurparsadi Ram man vasai ta fal pavai koi.”
(Gujri Mohalla 3, p-491)

‘All repeat God's Name, yet He is not attained
But when through the Grace of the Guru
God comes to reside in the mind

It is only then one's life becomes fruitful.’
(Translation of the above)

38. The question arises, is there any other way for a Sikh to
attain his objective of salvation? No, says Gurmat, there is no
other way. This world is a vast and formidable ocean of Maya
materialism). A Sikh has to cross this ocean to meet his Beloved God. The
ocean seems endless and there are countless obstructions in the way. In
order to get through this dangerous and formidable sea, one needs a

20

strong ship and that ship is only the Guru, the Divine Light. In order to
get into the Guru's ship, a Sikh needs a passport, and that passport is
baptism.

"Bhavjal bikham dravno na kandhi na par
Na beri na tulha na tis vanj malar

Satgur bhai ka boihtha nadri par utar."
(Sri Rag Mohalla 1, p-59)

‘The fearful ocean of the world is dangerous and
formidable; it hath no shore or limit,

No boat, no raft, no pole, and no boatman;

But the true Guru hath a vessel for the terrible ocean,
and ferrieth over him on whom he looketh with favor.’
(Translation of the above)

The ceremony of baptism was started by the very first Guru. Those
persons who became Guru's Sikhs, were baptized by the Guru. By mere
attending the assembly of the Guru, one did not automatically become a
Sikh of the Guru. From the first to the tenth Guru, baptism ceremony
consisted of taking Charanpauhal i.e. Guru's toe (or feet) was dipped in
the water which was then given to the devotee to drink and also
Gurmantar (Word) was given by the Guru. After the creation of the
Khalsa, the tenth Guru changed this tradition and entrusted this
ceremony to the Five Beloved Ones.After that those who accepted the
Guru's religion ( Sikh religion), were baptized and they were called the
Khalsa (the word Sikh and Khalsa became synonymous). The Guru issued
instructions to all to get baptized and join the order of the Khalsa. Guru
Gobind Singh was the first one to get baptized by the Five Beloved Ones.
Let it, therefore, be very clear to every Sikh that in order to get into
Guru's fold and seek Guru's grace, one will have to get baptized by the
Five Beloved Ones: Only then one's efforts towards spiritualism become
fruitful. From Guru Nanak to Guru Gobind Singh, those who called
themselves Guru's Sikhs, were always baptized by the Gurus. It is the
Guru's order for every Sikh to get baptized and therefore after obeying
his order one can get accepted by the Guru:-

"Hukam maniai howai parvan ta khasmai ka mahal paisi."
(Asa di Var pauri 15, p-471)

'By obeying His order, one is acceptable

And shall then reach his Master's court.’
(Translation of the above)

21

32. Baptism is only the starting point towards the attainment of spiritual
goal. Virtuous and religious living according to the Guru Rahit Maryada
(Code of Conduct) is to be cultivated in daily practical life. The codes of
conduct include spiritual awakening, conscientious performance of one's
duty, humility, temperance and charity. Mere outward faith without
practical adherence to the codes of conduct, will not lead the disciple
towards the spiritual goal. After baptism, through constant devotion and
heartfelt love to the order of the Guru in every walk of life, the disciple
seeks the Guru's grace. Through submission and unconditional surrender
before the Guru, the devotee is reborn in the spirit of the Guru; and only
at that stage a disciple is truly called a Sikh:-

‘Guru sikh, sikh guru hai eko gur updes chalai

Ram nam mant hirdai devai Nanak milan subhai.’
(Asa Mohalla 4, p-444)

"The Guru is a Sikh, the Sikh is a Guru; they are both one,
but it is the Guru who giveth instruction

He putteth the spell of God's Name in the heart, O Nanak,
and then Gad is easily obtained."
(Translation of the above)

Haumai (Egoism - I-am-ness)

38° God is everywhere and within us too, but a veil of ego separates us
from Him, ft hides the Truth from us:~-

"God, the Incomprehensible, is within us but not perceived

For the screen the 'ego' hangs in between."
(Rag Sorath Mohalla 5, p-624)

34. All the five vices- lust, anger, greed, attachment and ego; are the
obstructions in the way of spiritual path, but egoism is the paramount of
all, In the Guru's words one of the most recurring key terms is Haumai
(l-am-ness) which is regraded as synonymous with the most insidious
evil. Egoism is the moral evil which is the root cause of all ill doings. This
egoism is the consequence of illusion, of looking upon the individual-self
as of paramount importance. Ali his activities are exclusively directed
towards himself. "In ego he takes birth and in ego he dies," (Asa Mohalla
1, p-466). It spoils the fruit of great penances. The veil of ego when
descends on a great Yogi makes him loose in a moment, whatever he had
gained through self-mortification practised for years. This egoism is a
disease and an obstacle in the way of spiritual uplift of an individual.
Purpose of life centers on the spiritual salvation of a man through the

22

glorification of the Divine and imbibing Divine qualities in the process.
Blinded by the ego man cannot perceive the glory of the Divine.
Therefore, Nam will not reside in the mind as long as ego is there. Nam
and ego are two opposing elements: -

"Haumai nawai nal virodh hai doai na vasai ek thai."
(Wadhans Mohalla 3, p-560)

35. Egoistic mind cannot realize the 'morals' as laid down by the Guru,
thus leaving the depressed soul groping in the dark, never realizing its
goal. Egoism stands in the way of the desired spiritual attainment. Guru
calls egoistic man as ‘Manmukh’. By the grace of the Guru, ego is only
burnt through the Sabad: -

"Gur kai Sabad parjaliai ta eh vicho jai."
(Bilawal ki var, Mohalla 3, p-853)

Salvation - the way to God

3%. A body is dead without life and life itself is dead without Nam. Nam
is the Elixir of life without which life would be meaningless and an
accumulative waste. Forgetting Nam torments the soul. There is no
spiritual awakening, no peace of mind, no joy and no bliss without Nam.
Realization of Nam is the essential condition for a true and fruitful life.

"The tongue that repeateth not
His Name Better it be cut out bit by bit."
(Funhe Mohaila 5, p-1363)

&. Gurmat rejects all fasts, rites and rituals as a means to attain
salvation. Gurmat rejects claims of yoga, mortification of body, self-
torture and penances or renunciation. Gurmat does not believe in the
worship of gods and goddesses, stones, statues, tombs, crematoriums,
Samadhies, idois and pictures. Gurmat forbids the worship of anything of
the Creation as a means to attain salvation. Only one God, the Formless,
the Creator of the world is to be Glorified.

38. The road that leads to God is the most difficult and complex. Guru
Nanak has made this road simple and as clear as crystal by showing us a
technical approach. The Guru explains that since the human life is
attained after passing through numerous lives, so it has gathered along
the way impurities of every life it has passed through. Human mind has
become black smeared with these impurities: -

"The impurity of many births hath attached to man's mind,

and it hath become quite black.”
(Slok Mohalla 3, p-651)

23

#9, As long as the human mind remains impure, it will not merge with
the One Who is Absolute Pure, As the mind becomes pure, the soul will
merge with the Supreme Soul. How does the mind become pure?

“Maen te dhokha ta lahai ja sifat kari ardas."
(Rag Wadhans Mohalla 1, p-557)

‘Praise and prayer (to God) maketh the mind pure.” ~
(Translation of the above)

#0. Those who have done it, have crossed the ocean of Maya and
merged with Him:-

"Tu sacha sahib sifat sualio jin kiti so par piya."
(Slok Mohalla 1, p-469)

‘Thou art the True Lord, Beautiful is Thy Praise;
He who utters it, is saved,’
(Translation of the above)

ai. Explanation: If a glass is full of dirty water, pour constantly pure
water into it. The constant pouring of pure water into the glass, wil! throw

the dirty water out of the glass and ultimately the glass itself will be full of
pure water.

427. In the same way the constant prayer and praise of God, will clean
the impure mind. Human mind is in chaotic state. It is full of five vices-
lust, anger, greed, attachment and pride or ego. These are the obstacles
in the realization of Nam. Purity of mind is needed for spiritual uplift. No
man or monk can achieve salvation without disciplining the worid of inner
chaos. This discipline of inner chaos by banishing these five vices from the
mind, is a pre-requisite for spiritual excellence which is commanded by
the Guru. Singing the Glory of the Lord, the Mighty King, will help purge
the mind of its impurities. By glorifying the Divine, the human mind
imbibes divine qualities in the process. As a result when all the impurities
are one, Nam will enshrine the pure mind. This will lead to exalted mental
state from chaotic state.

43° Spiritual evolution will occur resulting in Heavenly Bliss:-

"Prayer and praise of God, shall give rise to Nam inside."
(Ramkali Mohalla 3-Anand, p-917)

24

4p. Gurmat further states that when hands are smeared with ordinary
dirt, simple water will wash it away- Tf urine makes the cloth dirty,
ordinary water cannot. wash it, only scap will clean it. Similarly when our
mind is full of impurities (sins), it needs some strong detergent and that
detergent is Nam.~

“As hands or feet besmirched with slime,
Water washes white; ,

As garments dark with grime,
Rinsed with soap are made light;

So when sin foils the soul,
prayer alone shall make it whole." |
(Japji- pauri 20, p-4)

The effect of Prayer and Praise is, firstly all the impurities of the
mind are wasned away and it becomes pure; secondly aS 4 result when
the mind becomes pure, then the nectar of Nam enshrines the mind:-

"prayer and praise of Almighty
removeth the impurity of mind

And the Ambrosial Nam then filleth the mind.”
(Gauri Sukhmani Mohalla 5, 1-4, p-263)

46. That is the stage a true devotee yearns for. By prayer and praise,
one's mind comes in touch with Nam and becomes itiuminated. AN:
enlightened mind emerges and a person is reborn in the spirit of the Guru
and he begins to make spiritual progress slowly. Nam is registered by the
consciousness and penetrates into the human soul and mind. This
glorious transformation or metamorphosis helps transcend human soul to
a state of Absolute Bliss. Tt is a change in a person which occurs within
the self from one form to another. The aspect of realization of God hanges
within and lifts the devotee from the Personal to the Impersonal. All
poundaries, limitations and barriers are broken and the individual soul
starts merging with the Supreme Soul, as water blends with water, the
light blends with the Divine Light:-

"His soul and body dyed with the Name of One God
Shall ever abide with the Supreme Soul.

As water plendeth with water,

So light is blended with Light.

transmigration is ended and rest obtained-

Nanak is ever a sacrifice to the Lord.”

(Gauri Sukhmani Mohalla 5, 11-8, p-278)
ked the Guru," O Guru, you Say that
one should not renounce the world rather live in it but the element of
Maya (materialism) is so Powerful, how can One overcome it and become

one with God while living in Maya itself? Please explain your logic behind
it."

"The great S€a of life is hard to cross,

Pray tell us how to get safely across it,"
(Sidh Gosht- Charpat, P-938)

48° Guru Nanak gave two examples:-

(a) A lotus flower always floats above the Surface of the water, It

without Maya (materialism) in the world, yet while living in it, we
are to live above Maya. Material needs are desired and are
necessary to sustain the very vital functions of life. Therefore, as a
lotus flower and duck do not drown in the water while living in it, a
Person should remain detached and disinterested with Maya, not
forgetting God. That js Possible through Praise and prayer,
Communion with Sabad (Divine Word) will SUppress the element of
Maya and would enshrine Nam within oneself which in turn would
lead a person back into the Unmanifest One:-

"AS a lotus flower remains unaffected in Water

O Nanak, the dreadful world ocean is crossed Safely."
(Ramkali Mohalla 1, Sidh Gosht.5, p-938)

26

meditation becomes mechanical, formalistic and hence futile.The result
cannot be positive. Secondly, even if we know the meaning of the Sabad,
but our mind is not in the Sabad and it keeps wandering away while we
are reciting the Sabad, the outcome will not be significant. One must,
therefore, remember that Prayer with absent mindedness wiil not be
fruitful and thereby not acceptable to the Lord (‘Ardas hazuri di manzoor
hundi hai’). Attentive, alert and completely untainted mind is required for
meditation. Thus whenever we réad, hear or sing Gurbani (Sabad)}, we
must put our whole ATTENTION IN THE MEANING OF THE SABAD, which
is being read, heard or sung. As our attention of mind and Sabad become
one, our mind starts taking the impact of the spirit of the Sabad and the
result of this COMMUNION IS BLISS, PEACE AND EVERLASTING JOY. In
this communion one experiences a taste which cannot be described and is |
called Heavenly Elixir (Hari Ras):-

"O man, all other 'Rasas' (things of relish) thou tasteth
Satiate not thy thirst even for a moment.

But if thou ever tasteth the Heavenly Elixir (Hari Ras)
Thou shalt be simply wonder-stuck."
(Gauri Guareri Mohalla 5, p-180)

;
$0, When the communion of mind with-Sabad is astablished, the disciple
is reborn in the Spirit of the Guru. He then blends with the Word (Sabad),
and never faces death after this spiritual rebirth: -

"He who dies in the Word, never dies again

And his devotion becometh fruitful."
(Rag Sorath, Slok Mohalla 3,p-649)

BY Those who establish communion with Sabad (Gurbani-Divine Word),
shall certainly experience uninterrupted Bliss: -

"He will become holy, holy, holy, shalt undoubtedly be holy

© Nanak, who uttereth Nam with heartfelt love.”
(Gauri Sukhmani Mohalla 5, 12-8, p-279)

PILGRIMAGES- Bathing at Holy Places

5p. A great deal of emphasis on rituals had been the way of Indian
religious life for the millions before Guru Nanak appeared on the scene.
Wherever Guru Nanak went, he tried to emancipate the masses from the
shackles of superstition and ignorance, and instil faith in One All-
Pervading and Formiess God. At that time people believed that bathing in
the river Ganges and other holy places would absolve them of their sins.
The Guru asserted that mere bathing at these sacred piaces, would not

27

cleanse the mind riddied with the impurity of egoism.

BB.

"Tirath bharmas biadh na jawai

Nam bina kaise sukh pawai."
(Ramkali Mohalla 1, p-906)

"Wandering through the pilgrim places,
One is not rid of one's maladies.

There can be no peace without Nam.'
(Translation of the above)

The Guru stressed that no abiding peace could be achieved without

meditating on Divine Name. Meditation on Nam is the only true
pilgrimage: -

Re

“Tirath nahvan jao tirath nam hai

Tirath sabad vichar unter gian hai."
(Dhanasri Mohalla 1, p-687)

"Shall we go to bathe at the pilgrim places?
No. Nam is the only true pilgrimage. ~-
Pilgrimage is the contemplation on the Word
That gives inner spiritual light.'

(Translation of the above)

In another place, the Guru has The Guru emphasizes the futility of

rushing to the sacred bathing places for the expiration of sins. Guru
Nanak states in Japji that he would bathe at the spots considered sacred,
if it could please the Lord. The implication is that such ceremonies by
themselves would not win God's approbation, without cultivating the
moral life: -

“If it pleaseth the Lord

I would bathe at the sacred places.

If it pleaseth Him not

Worthless is that pilgrimage.

I see in the whole world around

That nothing can be gained without right action,"
(Japji, pauri-6)

28

Compared those who bathe at the sacred places to attain merit,
with jars full of poison, which are washed only from outside. It means
that the evil inside a man, cannot be removed despite outward ritual
performances.

Caste system and Social Equality

In an age when class distinction was very rigid and when the bonds
of caste system in India had strictly divided the people, Guru Nanak
taught equality and brotherhood. The Guru rose above rites and rituals,
above creeds and conventions, above al! national-cults and all race-cults,
to a vision of the deeds of love. He preached a religion of Jove, sacrifice
and service. Complete equality among men was declared by the Sikh
Gurus te be the fundamental moral principle required to regulate the
social relations and communication,

58. The Guru points out that there is no fundamental difference among
men of different castes in terms of physical constitution. In a polemical
discussion with the Brahmans, Kabir inquires: -

“How are you a Brahman and I am a low caste?

Is it that I have blood in my veins.and you have milk?"
(Gauri Kabir p-324) ,

&6. This exposes the absurdity of any contention or a claim by the
higher caste men that there are physical differences among men of the
different castes. The Guru points out that the laws of nature do no react
differently in respect to the higher caste men. Since the nature makes no
discrimination in favor of the higher caste men by recognizing their

superiority in any manner, the myth of caste superiority is clearly seen as
man-made. The Guru states: -

"What merit is in caste?

The real truth is that he who tastes the poison will die.”
(Var Majh, Mohalla 1, p-142)

57. The Guru vehemently regards caste as an abnormality and social
perversity when he says:-

“Everyone says there are four castes,

but it is from God that everyone comes;

The same is the clay which fashions the whole world;

The five elements make up the body's form, .

and who can say who has less of these or who has more?"
(Rag Bhairon Mohaila 3, p-1128)

88° The Guru denies that caste was prevalent from the beginning, In
‘the primordial state: -

“No man of caste or birth could be seen ...

There was no distinction of color or coat or of the Brahman
or Kashatriya..."
(Maru Mohalla 1, p-1035-36)

“§9, The claim that the different caste men had emanated from the
different parts of the Primeval Man is also repudiated by the Guru:-

"His caste is castelessness.
He is incarnated not,
He is Self-Existent...

All hearts are illuminated by the Light of the Lord..."
(Sorath Mohalla 1, 1-2 of 6, p-597)

60. The Guru, thus, refuses to accredit the caste institution in social
ethics and further denies God having favored a few by bringing them out
from the higher parts of His body. (These were some of the arguments of
the Brahmans to have superiority from birth over low castes). Finally it is
held by the Guru that the caste is of no consideration in the spiritual
realization, that men of lower caste need not wait to be born again in the
next higher class for the attainment of deliverance: -

“Tumra jan jat avijata har japio patat pavichhe.”
(Basant Mohalla 4, p-1178)

.'Whosoever contemplates on God, caste or no caste,

he becomes a blessed devotee of God.’
(Translation of the above)

30

pe The tenth Master, Guru Gobind Singh, declared caste a taboo in the
‘order of the Khalsa. In Akal Ustat, he states,” There is no consideration of
caste or membership of varnas.” He further writes, "T shall not adopt the
habits of any creed, but shall sow the seeds of the pure love of God."
(Vachitar Natak, chap. 6, verse 34),

62" The first of the Sikhs baptized into the order of the Khalsa belonged
to different castes. The theory of separate duties for different castes was
replaced by the same ethical and religious duties for all men. Therefore,
the fundamental equality of ail men was ensured by free and voluntary
admission into the order of the Khalsa.

Social Equality

68. Wealth also provides a determinant of social classes as against birth
in the case of caste system. In Sikhism the relation among classes based
on economic resources is envisaged in terms of equality. It rejects the
notion of superiority of the economically better placed class over others.
The Guru says:-

"The man who knoweth God looketh on all men as equal,

As the wind bloweth on the commaner and the king alike."
(Gauri Sukhmant Mohalla 5, 8-1, P-272)

ee Thus in Sikhism the higher classes are not governed by any
separate code of ethics, but all men, rich or poor, are entitled to equal
judgment, value and social equality. Since the death is the leveller, the
Guru highlights this notion:-

"One lives not for ever in the world;

Neither king nor beggar would remain, they all come and

(Ramkali Mohalla 1, 11, p-931)

65. Therefore improper consideration of the superiority of rank are
based on a wrong conception of the nature of the world. The need for the
recognition of human dignity, irrespective of economic classes, is also
stressed in an anecdote from the biography of Guru Nanak called the
story of Bhai Lalo and Malik Bhago. In that incident Guru Nanak refused a
rather sumptuous dinner of Malik Bhago for the ordinary bread of the
coarse grain of Bhai Lalo. The moral is drawn that the poor ought not to
be treated as low, all must be treated as equal irrespective of their
material resources.

31

Status of Women

66. The position of a woman in the society in India, has not been
always the same. While at times she had been accorded a very high
status, there are also historical and scriptural instances when under some
influences, she has been relegated to an inferior position. At the start of
Sikhism the status of women was very low in Indian society,
67. In Sikhism it is considered preposterous to regard woman a
‘temptress' or 'seductress' or ‘unclean’. The Guru does not regard 'woman’
as an obstruction on the way to ultimate goal of Eternal Bliss. This being
so, the Guru rejects asceticism or renunciation as the requisite pathway,
and regards the house-holder's life if it is led in a righteous manner,
superior to that of an ascetic, By emphasizing this type of vision to the
people, the Guru stresses that women should be given honorable status in
every social segment of the society. Guru Nanak asserted that women
were not at all inferior to men:-

"From the woman is our birth,

in the woman's womb are we shaped:

To the woman we are engaged,

to the woman we are wedded;

The woman is our friend and

from the woman is the family:

If one woman dies, we seek another,

through the woman are the bonds of the world;

Why call woman evil who gives birth to kings?

From the woman comes the woman,

without woman there is none;

O Nanak, God alone is the one

Who is independent of the woman (because He is unborn)."
(Var Asa Mohalla 1, 2-19, p-473)

32

&é. This declaration shows unequivocally the high esteem in which a
woman's status is held in Sikhism. Woman ‘the mother of mighty heroes'
is elevated to the highest position in the hierarchy of beings. In the moral
codes of the Sikhs a large number of injunctions deal with the rejection of
unethica! practices like:-

(a) Female infanticide.
(b) Immolation of the widow (Sati) with the deceased husband.

(c) Wearing of veils by women.

68. In the ancient period in India, it was stated according to spiritual
authority that self-immolation on the funeral pyre of her husband was the
only meritorious course that a virtuous woman could follow; not only
would such a woman enjoy eternal bliss in heaven along with her
husband, but her action would expiate the sins of three generations of her
husband's family both on his father’s and mother's side.

71g Guru Amar Das, the third Guru, carried out a vigorous campaign
against this practice of Sati, and thereby he emancipated the women from
this social oppression and religious cruelty. The Guru declared that:-

"the Sati is one who lives contented
and embellishes herself with good conduct,

and cherishes the Lord ever and calls on Him.”
(Rag Suhi, Siok Mohalla 3, 2-6, p-787)

7 One of the most notable social improvements was the emancipation
of women. Many women found salvation through the Guru's teachings. In
Sikhism widow remarriage is also permitted whereby the widow can be
rehabilitated if she so desires.

Institutions of Sangat and Pangat

Fe. SANGAT- Society of the Holy. Sangat means assembly or
“congregation, but in Sikhism Sangat is usually called Sat Sangat (holy
congregation) which may be defined as the Home of Truth where people
love God and learn to live in dim:-

"Sat Sangat kaisi janiai jithai eko nam vakhaniai."
(Sri Rag Mohaila 1, p-72)

‘How should we know of Sat Sangat?

Where the lovers of Truth hold communion
with One Lord alone.’
(Translation of the above)

33

#8. Again the fourth Guru gives definition of Sangat:-

"Sat Sangat is the school of the True Guru,

- There we learn to love God and appreciate His greatness."
(Var Kanra Mohalla 4, p-1313)

"Sat Sangat is the treasury of Divine Name;
There we meet God;

Through the Grace of Guru,

One receives there Light and all darkness is dispelled,"
(Sarang ki Var, Mohalla 1, p-1244)

PA It is well recognized fact that spiritual progress cannot be achieved
without the company of the Holy. The society of the holy is the means of
destroying egoism and helps one in freeing oneself from evil passions:-

"The dirt of egoism of ages which has soiled the soul,
Will be removed only in the Society of the Holy.
Just as iron floats when tied to timber .

So will one cross the ocean of life by following

The Guru's Word in the company of the saints.”
(Kanra Mohalla 4, p-1309)

"O friend, tell me how I might cross

Through the difficult ocean of Maya:

If God in His mercy gives the fellowship of the Truthful

Nanak, Maya cannot come even near."
(Bavan Akhri Mohatla 5,(7}, p-251)

34

76. Wherever Guru Nanak went, the Sikhs built Gurdwara (house of the
Guru) and met there every day and formed into a regular Sangat. From
the time of the third Master, Guru Amar Das, it was felt that the Sikhs
should have their own seats of religion. He founded the town of Chak Ram
Das which subsequently got its present. name, Amritsar; and he got a
Bawli (a well with staircase reaching down to the water surface)
constructed at Goindwal. The fourth and fifth Masters also evinced great
interest in building up new religious centers for their followers such as
Amritsar, Kartarpur etc. These religious centers formed a great cementing
force for the rising Sikh community. The Sikh Sangats from far and near
used to visit these centers and had the opportunity not only meeting the
Holy Guru and having his blessings, but also coming into close contact
with one another. During their visit they were provided with free
accommodation and free food. Simron (participation in daily religious
service) and seva (participation in the community projects and Guru ka
Langar, kitchen) were the two major constituents of the daily routine of
the visiting Sikhs. These close contacts formed the bases of a well-
integrated Sikh organization.

77. The process of integration of Sikhism went hand in hand with the
enlargement of its ranks. During the time of the third Guru, there were
twenty-two manjis and fifty-two piris, which were all big and small
centers for the spread of Sikh religion in the country. Guru Ram Das, the
fourth Master, established a new order of missionaries called Masands.
This new order was reorganized and elaborated by the fifth Guru. As the
number of new Sikh Sangats grew larger in the country, the mode of
initiation of prospective Sikhs through the ceremony of Charanpauhal
(Charanamrit) was allowed to all authorized missionaries. Although the
ideal Charanamrit was the one administered by the Guru himself, since it
was not possible for the Guru to be present physically everywhere, the
authority of initiation was delegated to local missionaries. The bulk of the
people who came to the foid of Sikhism as a result of the above efforts,
were drawn from the commercial classes mostly dwelling in the towns.
During the period of the fifth Guru, the movement became popular in the
country side also, with the result that a iarge number of Majha Jats
embraced Sikhism.

Lis Finances are most necessary for the success of any movement. In
the beginning, the voluntary offerings of the devotees were sufficient.
When big projects were undertaken, the existing practice was found
inadequate. In order to meet the situation, the masands were required
not merely to concentrate on the dissemination of Sikh teachings, but
also to collect voluntary offerings from the faithful and to bring them to
the headquarters of the Guru. In the very beginning Sikh sangat was
merely a religious gathering of devotees, functioning more or less in
isolation. Gradually there was an increase in its functions.

79. Preparation of copies of holy scripture, the building up of certain
religious centers, institutions of Manjis and Masands as the agencies of
the central leadership and the assertion of the principle of the supremacy
of the Guru, all these factors were common links in uniting one to
another. Therefore, the isolation of one from another was lessened. The
movement continued till it culminated in the creation of the Khalsa aimed
at a well balanced combination of the ideals of Bhakti and Shakti, of moral
and spiritual excellence and militant valour or heroism of the highest
order. A day before he left this world, Guru Gobind Singh made the
historic announcement abolishing the line of personal Guruship and
conferring the powers of deliberation upon the Khalsa. With the
foundation of the Khalsa, the network of semi-integrated Sangats was
fully integrated. The investing of Khalsa with supreme power, marked the
completion of this long process of about two and a half centuries.

80, Any one irrespective of caste, creed and cline can become a
member of the Sangat. All services can be performed by the Sikh and
non-Sikh devotees except the functions of baptism which can only be
performed by the ordained Khaisa who has lived up to the ideals. Sangat

is not merely a gathering of worshippers nor is it just a forum for seeking

personal salvation and blessedness, but it has stood for the total re-
orientation of life of the individuals and society towards a creative
purposeful existence. Sangat was considered to-be so important that even
the Gurus used to submit to the decisions of it. Guru Arjan did not marry
‘his son to Chandu's daughter because Sangat had decided against it.
Sangat can be a small unit but in its Totality, it is‘called Panth- The Holy
Way of Life.

PANGAT- Guru's Free Kitchen known as Langar
ae urs Free Kitchen known as Langar

81. Another institution, that of Pangat or Langar (free common
messing), organized aimost simultaneously with that of Sangat. It was
initiated by Guru Nanak and its consolidation and extension was affected
by the third Guru. The rules of the Langar require that all should sit in the
Same row and partake of the same food without any distinction of high or
low, rich or poor, and prince or the peasant. It was the injunction of Guru
Amar Das that none could have his audience unless he had eaten in the
Langar. When the Raja of Haripur or even Emperor Akbar, came to see
the Guru, they had to sit with other common people and dine together
with them before the Master gave consent to see them. In this way the
people were made to renounce their social’ prejudices, Common kitchen
also served as a medium of social integration.

82. The institution of Pangat imparted a secular dimension to the
Sangat. Most importantly it translated the principle of equality into
Practice, and it also served as a cementing force among the followers of
Sikhism. This institution provides safeguard against the immoral social
Practice of untouchability which is a by-product of the caste system.

36

83. This institution is run with the help and contributions of all and not
by any one particular person or class of persons. The free kitchen where
prince and peasant could mess together, fostered a spirit of charity on a
large scale and also became a powerful binding force.
Universal Brotherhood
84. The ideal of social equality is not the ultimate aim of the ethics of
Sikhism. This equality may be maintained without feeling any affection or
regard for each other, but such bare equality would not be enough
because it does not conform to the ideal of humanistic morality. Hence in
order to make it whole, it should be saturated with the idea of spiritual
unity of mankind. The Guru stated: -

"As out of a single fire, millions of sparks arise;

arise in separation but come together

again when they fall back in the fire.

As from a heap of dust,

grains of dust sweep up and fill the air,

and filling it fall in a heap of dust.

As out of single stream,

countless waves rise up and being water,

fall back in water again.

So from God's form emerge alive and

inanimate things and since they arise from Him,

they shall fall in Him again."
(Guru Gobind Singh- Akal Ustat)

85. This means that every human being deserves to be treated as a
member of the same human brotherhood. The fellow human being is not
an ‘other’. The Guru says: -

"Meeting with the Guru,

I have abandoned the sense of the otherness.”
(Bhiro Mohalla 5, 1-29-42, p-1148)

37

86. The other is in fact not an ‘other’ but a co-sharer of the same
source of emanation and a part of the Saime spiritual order. This sense of
brotherhood of humanity is, thus, linked together by bonds deeper than
family, social or national affinities. This brotherhood of mankind in terms
of God being the common father is stressed by the Guru:-

"Thou art.the father of us all,......aH are the partners,

Thou art alien to none,"
(Majh Mohalla 5, p-97)

87. The Guru is pointing to the common bonds of existence in the
wortd:-

“Air is the Guru, water is father, great earth the mother;
In the lap of two nurses, night and day,

the whole world is brought up."
(Japji, Siok, p-8)

88. According to the Guru, the brotherhood is the reality but it is hidden
from us by the veil of houmai (I-am-~-ness or individuation), Houmai is the
dirt over our mind which it has gathered during the process of
transmigration. Once this dirt over our mind is removed and the veil of
houmai (I-am-ness) is felled, the relationship across the human lines
becomes a clear reality. As long as our minds remain under veil of i-am-
ness, our understanding will continue to be hollow and away from reality,
How do we lean our mind? As mentioned before the Guru gives direction
how to clean the mind:-. -

"Only through praise and prayer to God

Mind will become pure."
(Wadhans Mohalla 1, p-557)

89. Once mind becomes Pure, it attains a spiritual height in which
reality opens up and ali delusion is gone and then sense of universal
brotherhood prevails: -

"There is One father of us all

And we are children of the same father."
(Sorath Mohalla 5, p-611)

"I am neither a Hindu nora Muslim;

38

The soul and body belong to God

whether He be called Allhah or Ram."
(Bhairo Mohalia 5, p-1136)

"O eyes of mine, God infused light unto you,
look at none but God;
Look at none but God; look on Him intently.
All this world which you behold is God's image;
God's image appeareth in it.
_ When by the Guru's grace I received understanding,
I saw that God was One, and that there was none besides.
Saith Nanak, these eyes were blind,

but on meeting the true Guru they obtained divine light.”
(Ramkali Mohalla 3, Anand-36, p-922)

¥

90. Once by the grace of the Guru, our heart is filled with divine light,
then there is no ‘other', there Is no enmity, no hatred, but it is all altruism
and service for the brotherhood of mankind. In the practical experience
we find an example of Bhai Ghanaya. In the battlefield Bhai Ghanaya was
on duty to serve water to the thirsty. He was found serving water to the
Sikhs as well as to the Hindus and Muslims alike. The Sikhs complained to
the Guru that Bhai Ghanaya was serving water to the enemy soldiers who
after getting water, became afresh and fought against them. The Guru
sent for him and asked him what the Sikhs had complained. Bhai
Ghanaya replied," O true king, I do not see who is a friend and who is a
foe. I see your image in every one of them alike. I saw that they were all
your Sikhs and none else and so I served water to every one of them."

91. This is the desired mental stage commanded by the Guru when a
person's mind is lifted above the lines of religion, color, race or national
entity; and the sense of real universal brotherhood is born:-

"There is no enemy, none is ‘other’,

A sense of universal brotherhood has come to me.”
(Kanra Mohalla 5, p-1299)

39

92, Sikhism believes in it, stands for it and takes practical measures to
realize it. There are numerous examples in the Sikh history to emphasize
this fact. Guru Nanak travelled for fourteen years on foot and he covered
the area from Assam Hills in the east of India to as far as Iran and Iraq in
the west; from Tibet in the north to Ceyion in the south. During this long
journey he went to various famous Hindu temples and their learning
centers, Maths of Sidhas, and the various centers of Mohammadans
including Mecca, and delivered the Divine Messagé (brotherhood of
mankind and Fatherhood of God) for which he came to this world. Never
he asked anyone to become his disciple in order to go to heaven. He
rather held guarantee to the entire humanity that if a person, irrespective
of race, color, caste, creed, sex, religion or nationality, meditated on God,
the Formless One, would get deliverance: -

“Jo jo japai so hoai punit

Bhagat bhai lavai manhit,"
(Gauri Sukhmani Mohalla 5, 20-7, p-290)

‘He shall become pure, whosoever repeateth His Name

With devotion, affection and heartfelt love.’
(Translation of the above)

93. Sikhism fully stands for universal brotherhood in word and in spirit.
Every Sikh living in every corner of the world when he prays in the
morning and in the evening, ends his prayer by saying:-

"By Thy Grace, may everyone be blessed in the world,"

a
ae

40

Le Chapter 3
,
a
a“ Practicality of concepts of Sikhism
Ahimsa

1. | The term ahimsa is formed by adding the negative prefix a to the
word himsa which is derived from the Sanskrit root han, i-.¢. ‘to kill’, ‘to
harm’, or ‘to injure’, and means not-killing, not-harming, not-injuring.

2. Sikhism accepts ahimsa as a positive value, and there are
numerous hymns in the Guru Granth Sahib, the Sikh Scripture, advising
man to cultivate the ethical values of daya (compassion) and prem (love).
Tt, however, does not accept ahimsa as a mere absence of himsa or
violence. Love, justice, equality, self-respect and righteousness are
some of the overriding social values to guarantee which even himsa would
be permissible.

3. Sikhs’ social and ethical values are ail derived from their
metaphysical doctrine. Sikhism believes in the unicity of God, who in His
manifest form pervades the entire creation. Thus, all the created beings
in this phenomenal world are his manifestation and intrinsically one with
Him. This idea of inherent unity of being With the Supreme Being debars
man from using himsa or violence against another being because that
would amount to hurting the Divine. This ontological doctrine of divine
unity is in Sikhism the basis of all positive values of ahimsa such as social
equality, love, compassion, charity and philanthropy. Guru Arjan, in one
of his hymns, adjures man “not to injure anyone so that thou mayst go to
thy true home with honour.” Mercy or compassion towards living beings
is said to be equivalent in merit earned by pilgrimage to sixty-eight holy
spots. This religious value attached to the practice of mercy affirms the
principle of ahimsa . Guru Tegh Bahadur, Nanak IX, also says that one of
the marks of a wise man is that he does not terrorize others nor does he
allow himself to be terrorized by others.

4. The Sikh tradition is also replete with instances of sacrifices made
for the sake of justice, righteousness and human freedom. Guru Arjan
and Guru Tegh Bahadur laid down their lives to vindicate the right to
freedom and religious belief. The creation of the Khalsa Panth by Guru
Gobind Singh, Nanak X, and the use of sword as sanctioned by him were
also to vindicate the same values. The positive values of ahimsa like
compassion, love, universa! brotherhood, freedom and self-respect must
prevail, However, if these are violated, man must resist. When all

See ee

4]

peaceful methods for such resistance are exhausted, the use of sword, so
says Guru Gobind Singh, is lawful (Zafarnamah, verse 22). The use of
sword, however, is not for any personal gain or advancement; it has to be
for the general good. Thus was the doctrine of ahimsa reinterpreted. The
Gurus affirmed their faith in its positive values, but if himsa became
necessary to resist and defeat the forces Violating these values, it was not
considered antagonistic to ahimsa.

Bhakti

5. The word bhakti is derived from Sanskrit Bhaj, meaning to serve,
honour, revere, love and adore. In the religious idiom, it is attachment or
fervent devotion to God and is defined as “that particular affection which
is generated by the knowledge of the attributes of the Adorable One,”

6. Sikhism undoubtedly accepted some of the aspects of radicalized
bhakti, and admitted some of its Practices into its own ordained set. It
did lay down spiritual love, as the way to the deity, but the deity to be
worshipped was neither Siva nor Visnu nor even any of their incarnations,
nor any of the gods or goddesses of the Hindu pantheon. It was the One
and the Only God, the Lord of Universes who was at once transcendent
(nirguna) and immanent (saguna), Although immanent in His Creation
He was yet apart from it, being its Creator. Since he inhered in the world
that He had created, the wortd could not be considered unreal or illusory
(mithya or maya). It was real and sacred (the abode of the True One”).
It is therefore blasphemous to renounce jt in quest of God. “He that is |

- Imminent in the Universe resides also within yourself. Seek, and ye shall
find” (GG 695). Renunciation of the world as a spiritual pursuit thus
stood totally rejected. Celibacy was no longer countenanced, either, Full
Participation in life in a spirit of ‘detachment’ was prescribed instead. “Of
afl the religious rules and observances grihasthya (the homestead) is
supreme. It is from here that all else is blessed” (GG, 587), Guru is
Paramount in bhakti as well as in Sikhism.

7. The ideal that Bhakti laid down for man was to achieve personal
release (moksha or muktf). In Sikhism the ideal was stated in these
terms: “I long not for a kingdom or for mukt/ but only for the lotus feet
of the Lord” (GG 534). In the Sikh faith the highest ideal is to be able
cheerfully to accept the will of God (raza, bhana) and to live one’s life it
its dynamic mould, to be ready to give oneself to carrying out what ought
to happen. This concept of Divine Will (hukam) as weil as the injunction
to accept it cheerfully is peculiar to Sikhism. Also, whereas the ultimate

42

aim of bhakti is for the individual to attain personal liberation, the Sikh
ideal is well-being of all (sarbatt ka bhala),

8. The modes of worship in Bhakti cults included not only bhajan
(adoration) and kirtan (singing praises of the deity), but also Yogic
upasana (literally, to sit beside, to meditate), Vedic sacrifices,
Brahmanical ritualism ‘and Tantric practices. Of these, Sikhism retains
only bhajan and kirtan and disclaims the rest. It categorically rejects
sacrificial rites. The only sacrifice it approves of is self-sacrifice for the
sake of righteousness. Sikhism strongly censures idol-worship. Instead,
sabda (the Divine Word) is determined to be the focus of all adoration.
However, as in bhakti, nam (Logos) is both the object and means of
adoration of God

9, Thus, bhakti has been radically transformed and redefined in
Sikhism. Sikhism is in fact much wider than bhakti both in its conceptual
gamut as well as in practice. For the Bhakti cults, bhakti is the be-all and
end-all of everything; for Sikhism two other crucially important ends are
athical living and spiritual liberation. The cultivation of moral qualities, in
Sikhism, is the requisite precondition for bhakti, “Without morality bhakti
is not practicable (GG, 4). Mora! discipline is considered a vehicle for
attaining nearness to God. “It is by our deeds that we become closer to
God or become distant from Him” (GG, §).

10. While the bhagats’ sole stress was on bhakti or loving devotion, the
Gurus also wanted to inculcate along with love and faith the spirit of
fearlessness and valour among the Sikhs. A Sikh was to “overcome all
fear by cherishing the Fearless Lord” (GG, 293). “He must not terrorize
anyone, nor must he submit to anyone’s fear” (GG, 1427). He was “to be
subservient to none but the True Lord” (GG 473). He was not to be a
quietist ascetic but a valiant saint ready to “battle in open field” (GG 931)
to destroy the tyrants; In their scheme of ethical dynamism the Gurus
gave priority to zeal for freedom.

11. Sikhs were not only given nam (Logos) as the symbol of the
Formless One (which they shared with the bhaktas) but were also given
kirpan (sword) as the symbol of the Fearless One. Sikhism, thus
addressed itself to dual ideals, the other-worldly (pir/) as well as this-
worldly (mir/).

12. Since Fatherhood of God was the basic Sikh tenet, brotherhood of
man ipso facto became its social corollary. No one was to be reckoned
low or high -“Reckon the entire mankind as One” (Akal Ustati, 15.85) was

the Guru’s precept. Most of the bhakti cults also decried inequality, and

especially condemned caste-distinctions, giving the right of worship to the

low caste. However, service continued to be a menial Pursuit, and manual

labour was looked upon as the Job of the lowly. The Gurus went further
than just proclaiming the equality of man. They established dignity of
labour, by making social service (seva) as an important vehicle of Spiritual

advancement. “The hands and feet sans Seva are condemnable; actions

other than seve are fruitless” (Bhai Gurdas, Varan, XXVII. 10). Begging

Is taboo for the Sikhs. While bhaktas could live on alms and public

charity, not so a Sikh. He is Ordained to earn his living by the honest

labour of his hands (Kirt) and share his earnings with others, It rehearsed

in the fifteenth century the ideology of fraternity, equality and liberty. .
Devotion was defined as a positive phenomenon. Full-faced participation

in life was recommended. In the time and space setting, bhakti and

Sikhism lie close to each other which. has ied some to describe Sikhism as

an offshoot of bhakti. >

13. Like the bhaktas and the Sufis, Guru Nanak, founder of Sikhism,
proclaimed the love of God and, through it, communion with Him as the
primary aim of man. More like the former, he repudiated caste and the
importance of ritualism, and in common with the latter, emphasized
submission to God’s will as the ultimate means of realization. Agreeably
to the atmosphere created by Bhakti and Sufism, he rejoiced in singing
praises of the Almighty and indicated the way to reconciliation between
the Hindus and the Muslims. He brought to these general tendencies the
force and urgency of a deeply inspired and forward-looking faith. He
added elements which were characteristically his own and which
empowered current trends with wholly new possibilities of fulfilment. Life
in all of its different aspects was the subject of Guru Nanak’s attention,
Integral to his intuition was an awareness of the iils and errors of society
and his concern to remedy these. This was in contrast to the attitude of
escape implicit in Bhakti and Sufism. Guru Nanak did not admit, like
many of their protagonists, the possibility of man ever attaining, in his
mystical progress, equality with Divinity. He also did not share the
Bhaktas’ belief in incarnation or the Sufis’ insistence on bodily
mortification and frenzied singing and dancing to bring about spiritual
illumination. The faith begins with the revelation brought to light by Guru
Nanak. To understand Sikhism fully the study of the totality of its tenet
and of what impact it made on history will be very vital. In. this
Perspective, the precept he preached is definitively the starting-point of
Sikhism and not bhakti or any other cult.

44

Bhana

.

14. Bhana means liking, pleasure, will, wish or approval, is one of the
key-concepts in Sikh thought. In Sikhism, it refers specifically to God’s
will and pleasure. Raza, an Arabic term popular in the context of various
schools of Sufi thought, also appears frequently in the Sikh texts to
express the concept of bhana. According to this concept, the Divine Will
is at the base of the entire cosmic existence. It was His bhana, His sweet
will which was instrumental in the world’s coming into being: “Whenever
He pleases He creates the expanse (of the world of time and space) and
whenever He desires He (again) becomes the Formless One (all by
Himself)” (GG. 294). All our actions, our pain and pleasure, our worship,
penance and self-discipline, metapsychosis and liberation, heaven and
hell, are subject to bhana (GG, 963}. ,

15. Bhana or raza, the Divine Will, expresses itself through hukum, the |
Divine Law of nature. Bhana and hukum are closely related and are often
used synonymously. In the very first stanza of Japu, Guru Nanak uses
hukam and raza as a compound term. There, is, however, a subtle
difference between the two concepts. Hukam is the Divine Law while
bhana is the Divine Will. The latter is the source of and sanction behind
the former; “Hukam.is that which you desire” (GG, 17). Hukam is the
medium and instrument of the expression and operation of bhana. The
basic idea implicit in hukum is its imperative and unimpeachable nature to
which man must submit, but such submission is again subject to His
bhana. “When He desires He makes man to submit to hukum" (GG, 337)”
“In His Will, the Lord makes man submit to His command” (GG, 1093).

16. The inexorable hukam having its source in bhana, It follows that the
latter is equally, even more, inescapable and inevitable subject only to
itself in the form of nadar (q.v.). It therefore becomes the duty of man to
submit to the Divine Will willingly and gracefully. Submission to raza is
thus inherent in the concept of bhana. Bhana in the Sikh tradition yields
primarily the meaning of Divine Will itself, though taking equal cognizance
of the other meaning, viz. the attitude of submission on man’s part to the
Will Divine. The latter itself arises out of God's Will or Grace. In this
sense, i.e. bhana as attitude of submission of itself, is defined in gurbani
as a great gift. As says Guru Arjan, “The truth is that there is no gift as
great as bhana (submission to the Lords’ Will)”. (GG, 1093); says Guru
Amar Das, “On whomsoever Thou bestoweth bhana, to him Thy Will is
pleasing” (GG, 1064).

45

17, The Divine Will in the sense of inexorable ordinance or law of nature
is intimately related to the Problem of determinism versus free will, If
nothing happens or can happen without the Divine Will, there would be no
place for ethics and moral responsibility of man for his actions, good or
bad, whereas the Sikh precept keeps reminding man to make the choice:
to become acceptable at His portal or remain recalcitrant. Making a
choice is a volitional act and pursuing it involves freedom of action. Thus
Sikhism positing active Participation in life does recognize freedom of
action, but “within the contingencies of his finitude.” In this context, the
Sikh is required correctly to understand what pleases God, what is His
pleasure (bhana). Concentrated attention to and meditation upon the
Guru’s word helps him in such understanding. Guided by his
understanding of bhana, the Sikh is not only free to act but is required to
participate, “to battle on in open field with his mind fully in control” (GG,
931). He is supposed to quell his haumar (I-ness), to dedicate his actions
to the Lord’s Will and to surrender himself to His raza regards the
outcome of his-actions.

Bole So Nihai, Sati Sri Akal

18. Bole So Nihal, Sati Sri Akal is the Sikh slogan or jaikara (meaning
shout of victory, triumph or exultation). It is’ divided in two parts or
phrases. The first, bole so nihal or Jo bole so nihal, is a statement LE
meaning “whoever utters (the phrase following) shall be happy,
Shall be fulfilled,” and the second part sati sri aka/ (Eternal is the
Holy/Great Timeless Lord). This Jaikara, first popularized by Guru
Gobind Singh, has become, besides being a popular mode of expressing
ebullient religious fervour or a mood of joy and celebration, an integral
part of Sikh liturgy and is shouted at the end of ardas or prayer, said in
sangat or holy congregation. One of the Sikhs in the sangat, particularly
the one leading ardas, shouts the first phrase, Jo bole so nihal, in
response to which the entire congregation, including in most cases the
leading Sikh himself utter in unison sat/ sri akal in a long-drawn full-

all victory Gaya or Jai) belongs to God, Vahiguru, a belief that is also
expressed in the Sikh salutation Vahiguru ji ka Khalsa, Vahiguru ji ki
Fateh (Khalsa is of God and to God belongs the victory, or Hail the
Guru’s Khalsa! Hail the Guru's victory!) In their hour of triumph,
therefore, the Sikh’s remember sat/ sri akal instead of exulting in their
own valour.

46

19, Traditionally, the slogan or war-cry expressing communal fervour
and assent to or enthusiasm for a cause, sat sri akal has been so used
through the three-hundred-year-old history of the Sikh people, since the
creation of the Khalsa. In a norma! situation when two Sikhs meet, they
exchange greetings pronouncing Sat Sri Akal thus pointing out the glory
of God to each other. Although as a salutation it is by now the
established form of Sikh greeting, it does not have the sanction of history
or orthodoxy. Vahiguru ji ka Khalsa Vahiguru ji ki Fateh, the other form
of salutation, is generally used only by people punctilious in the
observance of proper form. Those addressing a Sikh religious
congregation will, as a rule, greet the audience with the salutation,
Vahiguru ji ka Khalsa Vahiguru ji ki Fateh. Sat Sri Akal shouted in unison
responding to the call jo bole so nihal (whoever so pronounces shall
prosper) is a call to action, or expression of ecstatic joy or an invocation
for Divine aid or succour, While sat or sati (Sanskrit satya) means ‘true’,
‘good’, ‘abiding’, ‘real’ and ‘eternal’, sri is an honorific denoting beauty,
glory, grace or majesty. Sati has the sanction of Guru Nanak’s Mul
Mantra in the Japu where after Ik Onkar, it appears as a constituent of
Satinamu (Reality Eternal). Aka/ also occurs in Mul Mantra in the phrase
Akal Murati (Form Eternal), descriptive of the Absolute.

Dan

20. DAN (Sanskrit Dana from the root da ‘to give’) means the act of
giving or that which is given either as charity or alms or as offering, fee or
reward for spiritual instruction received or for religious rite or ritual
performed.

21. The word dan as well as the concept has been assimilated into the
sikh tradition. Though there exist no codified injunctions about it, the
practice of dan is a significant feature of the Sikh way of life. The
emphasis here is more on giving than on receiving. No fixed group or
class of people is specified as favoured recipients of dan. Nor is any
particular commodity out of material belongings considered especially
sanctified for purposes of dan. However, whatever is given away in dan
must have been earned by one’s honest labour. Says Guru Nanak: “He,
O Nanak, who lives by his honest labour and yet gives away something
out of his hands, has alone found the (true) way” (GG, 1245). There are
numerous other verses in the Guru Granth Sahib extolling the virtue of
dan. Also from Guru Nanak, “He alone realizes the truth who is truly
instructed, who is compassionate towards all living beings and who
dispenses dan” (GG. 468). A Gurmukh or true devotee is advised to

47

practise “nam (remembrance of the Divine Name), dan and isnan (holy
bathing)” (GG, 942). Guru Arjan Nanak V: “Meditate on the Lord’s
Name, listen to the Lord’s Name being recited and to all render dan” (GG,
135). For himself Guru Nanak seeks the dan “of the dust from
underneath the feet of the holy ones which, if obtained, to my forehead
would I apply” (GG, 468). In the words of Guru Arjan: “the most
desirable boon to beg for is to beg of the Guru love of singing the Lord’s
laudation” (GG, 1018). In his daily ardas or supplicatory prayer, the
highest form of dan (danan sir dan) a Sikh seeks is the nam-dan, gift of
God’s name.

22, Sikhism does not countenance renunciation of material goods, nor
does it deprecate worldly callings. The popular aphorism kirt karni, nam
Japna, vand chhakna (to earn one’s living by the labour of one’s hands, to
repeat the Name of God and to eat only after sharing with the others
one’s victuals) forms an essential part of its ethical code. Whereas dan of
material goods is commended, one overriding implication is that what is
given away has been acquired through honourable means. Another
requisite is that dan must be given with a willing heart. It should be the
result of a spontaneous urge for an humanitarian act. As Guru Angad,
Nanak II, says, “Giving under compulsion earns no merit nor does it
benefit anyone; excellent is the deed, O Nanak, which is performed with
pleasure” (GG, 787), Another shade especially stressed in the Sikh
tradition is that dan be proffered in all humility and in an utterly selfless
spirit. It should not create a sense of pride or ego in the mind of one
who gives. Ego (haumai) vitiates the act of charity, Says Guru Tegh
Bahadur: “If one performing pilgrimages, observing fasts and giving dan
nourishes in his mind a sense of pride, all such acts remain fruitless like
the bathing of an elephant (who casts dust over his body after the bath)”
(GG, 1428). To dispense dan, one need not necessarily be affluent. A
simple meal served by an humble labourer to a casual guest is more
meritorious than a sumptuous feast given by a rich man to professional
mendicants.

23. In the Sikh tradition, all dan or offering is in the name of the Guru
and, usually, through golak (treasure, or receptacle kept In a gurdwara
for the devotees’ offerings) of the Guru or the Panth representing the
Guru, The channels for dan to flow into the Guru's treasury are by now
well established. First, the dictum gharib ki rasna, Guru ki golak
(a destitute’ tongue, i.e. mouth, is the Guru’s till) sets the general
principle that the primary object of charity is to feed the needy. This is
done through the systematized and organized institution known as Guru
48

Ka Langar. The second institutionalized channel for dan is dasvandh (lit.
tithes) or one-tenth of his earning a Sikh is required to set apart for the
welfare of the community. Contributions may be made at any recognized
centre—the local gurdwara, any historical shrine, an orphanage, school,
charitable hospital, and the like.

24. Inthe ardas or Sikh's daily prayer are listed the categories of dan a
Sikh supplicates for. The primary one is the dan or gift of the Holy Name.
He prays, besides, for the dan of the ideal Sikh way of life, the dan of true
Sikh conduct and discipline, the dan of unfaltering faith in Sikh principles,
the dan of unflinching trust in the Guru, the dan of company of pious
Sikhs, the dan of pilgrimage to the Harimandar at Amritsar and other
sacred places, and the dan of holy bath at Amritsar. The gifts that a Sikh
supplicates for are for the whole community and not for himself alone.
This sharing of blessing is part of the Sikh way of life.

Dasvandh

325. DASVANDH or Dasaundh, lit, a tenth part, refers to the practice
among Sikhs of contributing in the name. of the Guru one-tenth of their
earnings towards the common resources of the community. This is their
religious obligation—a form of seva or humble service so highly valued in
the Sikh system. The concept of dasvandh was implicit in Guru Nanak’s
own line: “ghali khai kichhu hathhu dei, Nanak rahu pachhanahi sei—He
alone, O Nanak, knoweth the way who eats out of what he earneth by his
honest labour and yet shareth part of it with others” (GG, 1245). The idea
of sharing and giving was nourished by the institutions of sangat (holy
assembly) and /angar (community kitchen) the Guru had established. In
the time of Guru Amar Das, Nanak Ill, a formal structure for channelizing
Sikh religious giving was evolved. He set up 22 manjis or districts in
different parts of the country, each placed under the charge of a pious
Sikh who, besides preaching Guru Nanak’s word, looked after the sangats
within his/her jurisdiction and transmitted the disciple’s offerings to the
Guru. As the digging of the sacred pool, amrit-sar, and the erection in
the middle of it of the shrine, Harimander, began under Guru Ram Das
entailing large amounts of expenditure, Sikhs were enjoined to set apart a
minimum of ten per cent (dasvandh) of their income for the common
pool, Guru Ki Golak (q.v.). Masands, i.e. ministers and the tithe-
collectors, were appointed to collect kar bhet (offerings) and dasvandh
from Sikhs in the area they were assigned to, and pass these on to the
Guru.

49

26... Dasvandh has since become part of the Sikh way of life. The custom
bears parallels to Christian tithes requiring members of the church to pay
a tenth part of the annual produce of their land or its equivalent in money
to support it and the clergy, and to Muslim zakat requiring assignment of
2.5 per cent of one’s annual wealth for the welfare of the destitute and
the needy. Classical Indian society had no set procedure for regulating
donations or charities, though references are traceable such as those in
Parasar Rishi’s writings urging the householder to reserve 1/21 part of his
income for Brahmans and 1/31 part for the gods. The Upanisads and the -
'Bhagavadgita commend “true alms” given with a sense of duty in a fit
place and at a fit time to a deserving person from whom one expects
nothing in return. Dasvandh is, however, to be distinguished from dan or
charity. It essentially attends to the needs of the community and
contributions are made specifically for the maintenance of its religious
institutions such as gurdwaras and guru ka fangar and projects of social
welfare and uplift,

27. The custom of dasvandh was codified in documents called
rahitnamas, manuals of Sikh conduct, written during the lifetime of Guru
Gobind Singh or soon after. For example, Bhai Nand Lal’s Tankhahnama
records: “Hear ye, Nand Lal, says Gobind Singh, one who does not give
_dasvandh and, telling lies, misappropriates it, is not at all to be trusted.”
The tradition has been kept alive by chosen Sikhs who to this day
scrupulously fulfil the injunction. The institution itself serves as a means
for the individual to practice personal piety as well as to participate in the
ongoing history of the community, the Guru Panth.

Dasamdvar

28, DASAMDVAR meaning ‘tenth gate’, is a concept in Sikhism which
signifies the door to enlightenment and spiritual vision. Dasamdvar in the
Hathayogic system is also known as brahmrandhra, moksadvara,
mahapatha and madhya marga, the terms frequently used in the esoteric
literature of medieval India. It is a term of religious physiology and its
significance lies in its being a concept in the framework of soteriological
ideology. Nine apertures (navdvaras) opening towards outside the body
serve the physical mechanism of human personality but when their
energy, normalfy being wasted, is consciously channelized towards the
self, the tenth gate or the dasamdvar opens inside the body and renders
a hyper-physical service by taking the seeker beyond the bondage - of
embodied existence.

30

29, The human body is endowed with nine doors also cajled holes or
streams. These nine are: two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, mouth, anus,
and urethra. All these are vital organs of living organism called human
being. The Pali Suttanipata (verse 199. In Khuddak nikaya, vol. 1, p. 297)
is perhaps one of the very first Indian texts which mentions the idea of
nine ‘holes’ in the body. It is from a philosophicatly ascetic or Sramanic
standpoint that the human body is described in this text as a mass of
bones, sinews, flesh, etc. and as a bag for belly, intestines, liver, heart,
bladder, lungs, kidneys, blood, bile, etc. “Ever from its nine streams
(navahi sotehi) the unclean flows.” The Svetasvatara Upanisad (HI. 18)
and the Bhagavadgita (V. 13) refer to human body as “a city with nine
gates” (nava dvara pure deh/) in which the Self dwells, neither acting nor
causing to act. The Katha Upanisad (2.51), however, describes human
abode of the Unborn One as “a city with eleven gates” (puram-ekadasa-
dvaram). Mystical and soteriological significance of dasamadvar is found in
the writings of the siddhas and the sants. As a matter of fact the history
of the idea of dasamdvar begins with the Buddhist Siddhas and we owe its
popularity to Natha yogis. The term as well as the concept first appears
in the works of Siddhas who flourished during the period between eighth
and eleventh centuries. The Siddhas transmitted the theory of dasamdvar
as a mystical spiritual gateway to Vaisniava Sants and thence it came to
the Sikh Gurus. The process of transmission was direct and natural since
the Sants (or Bhagats) and Gurus lived and taught in a society thoroughly
acquainted with and influenced by the terms, concepts and precepts of
the Siddhas. Although the concept of dasamdvar remained the same; its
functional value in theistic theology and socio-devotional methodology of
the Sikh Gurus became decidedly different from its original! one in the
non-theistic ideology and esoteric-ascetic methodology of Buddhist
Siddhas and Natha yogis.

30. The notion of dasamdvar, written as dasamduar, occurs several
times in the Guru Granth Sahib. Sikhism is a strictly monotheistic system
belief and it must be stated at the outset that according to Sikh view of
the dasamdvar, the tenth door opens into the abode of God, the Creator—
dasam duara agam apara param purakh ki ghati (GG, 974), and again—
nau ghar thape thapanharai dasvai vasa alakh aparai (GG, 1036). This
fact distinguishes Sikhism from the non-theistic non-dualistic philosophy
of the Siddhas. Second outstanding difference is that Sikhism is
predominantly a devotional pathway, relying chiefly on the discipline of
bhakti, i.e. loving devotion for the divine; the Siddhas and Nathas, on the
other hand, practised Tantra or Hathayoga in which the disciplines of
psychology and physiology were fused together. With these differences

the notion of dasamduar in Sikhism employs the same terms and symbols
as used by Siddhas and Nathas.

31. The nine doors (nau daryaje) and the tenth door are often
mentioned together to show their differences. The unstruck sound is
heard at the tenth door when it is freed from the shackles of nine doors in
the body—nau darvaje dasvai mukta anahad sabadu vajavania (GG, 110),
It is believed that the tenth door is closed by a hard ‘diamond-like door
(bajar kapat) which is haumai (self-centredness). This hard and strong
‘door is opened and the darkness of haumai is dispelled by the instruction
of the Teacher (Guru). In other words, the tenth door is the door of
enlightenment and it opens only when the door consisting of haumai is
broken. It is taken for granted in Sikhism that the tenth door is the
supreme state of the mind. It is certainly not a physical door; it is that
state of purified consciousness in which God is visible and ail contacts
with physical existence are cut off. It is called a being’s own house (nij-
ghar), that is to Say, a being’s real nature which is like light (jot SArup).
One hears day and night the anahad sabda there when one dwells in
one’s own house through the tenth door—nau dar thake dhavatu rahae,
dasvai nijghari vasa pae (GG, 124),

32. At few places in the Gurbani, the term dasémduar has been used to
denote ten organs—five sensory organs and five organs of action, i.e.
Jnanendriyas and karmendtiyas. Says Guru Nanak: “Hukam/ sanjogi gari
das duar, panch vasahi mili joti apar’—in the fortress-of the body created
in his Aukam are ten doors. In this fort five subtle elements of sabda
(sound), Sparsa (touch), rupa (sight), rasa (taste) and grandha (smell)
abide having the infinite light of the Lord in them (GG, 152). The armrit
which flows at the tenth door is the essence of Divine name (nam ras)
according to the Guru; it is not the physical elixir of immortality conceived
by the Siddhas, nor is this amrit to be found by awakening kundalini or by
Practising khecari mudra; it is to be found through the Teacher’s
instruction. When the Satguru is encountered then one stops. from
funning (after the nine doors) and obtains the tenth door. Here at this
door the immortalizing food (amrit bhojan), the innate sound (sahaj
dhuni) is produced—dhavatu thammia satiguri miliai dasva duaru paia;
tithai amrit bhojanu sahaj dhuni upajai jitu sabadi Jagatu thammi rahaia
(GG, 441),

33. This wholesome spot is not outside the physical frame. The second
Guru aiso refers to the fort (Kotu) with nine doors; the tenth door is
hidden (gupatu); it is closed by a hard door which can be opened by the

52

key of the Guru’s word (GG, 954). According to Guru Amar Das, Nanak
III, he alone is released who conquers his mind and who keeps it free
from defilement; arriving at the tenth door, and staying there he
understands all the three spheres (GG, 490).

34. The importance of dasamdvar is of considerable theologicai interest.
Here at the tenth door the anahad sabda (unstruck sound) is heard; here
the divine drink of immortality trickles down; and here the devotee meets
with the invisible and inaccessible transcendental Brahman who is
described by the sages as unutterable (GG, 1002).

35. The devotional theology of Sikhism requires that the gateway of
ultimate release can open only by God’s will. The tenth door is closed
with the adamantine hard door (bajar kapat) which can be opened duly
with the Guru’s word. Inside the front (i.e. the body) is the tenth door,
the house in the cavity (gupha ghar); in this fort nine doors have been
fixed according to Divine ordinance (hukam); in the tenth door the
Invisible, Unwritten, Unlimited Person shows Himself—bhitari kot gupha
ghar jai nau ghar thape hukami rajai; dasval purakhu alekhu apari ape
alakhu lakhaida (GG, 1033). This is the view expressed by the founder of
Sikhism and he repeats it at another place also. He says that the
Establisher has established nine houses {nau ghar) or nine doors in the
city of this body; the Invisible and Infinite dwells at the tenth house or
tenth door (GG, 1036). The nectar-like essence (amrit ras) is dripped by
the Satguru; It comes out appearing at the tenth door. The sounding of
the unstruck sound announces, as it were, the manifestation of God at
this door—Amrit rasu satiguru chuaia; dasavai duari pragatu hoi aia; taha
anahad sabad vajahi dhuni bani sahaje sahaji samai he (GG, 1069) The
Siddhas, unlike the Sikh Gurus, find the amrit by their own effort.

36. Occasionally the term das duar is used in gurban/ in the sense of
sensory and motor organs of body which should be kept under control.
For the most part, however, the Sikh Scripture stresses the need for
realization of the dasam duar, apart from God’s ordinance (hukam) and
Teacher's compassion (kirpa, prasad) and the necessity of transcending
the realm of three-strand nature (triguna maya). Kabir, for instance, says
that the tenth door opens only when the trinity (trikuti) of sattva, rajas
and tamas is left behind—trikuti chhutai dasva daru khulhai ta manu
khiva bhai (GG, 1123).

bk

33

Daya

37. DAYA usually spelt daia in Punjabi, from Sanskrit Day meaning to
sympathize with, to have pity on, stands for compassion, sympathy. It
means ‘suffering in the suffering of all beings.’ It is deeper and more
positive in sentiment than sympathy. Daya, cognitively, observes alien
pain; affectively, it gets touched by it and moves with affectional
responses for the sufferer; and conatively it moves one to act mercifully,
pityingly, with kindness and forgiveness. Daya is antithetical to hinsa

. (violence). One imbued with daya “chooses to die himself rather than

cause others to die,” says Guru Nanak (GG, 356),

38. Daya is a divine quality and a moral virtue highly prized in all
religious traditions. In the Sikh Scripture, mahedaial (super
compassionate), dalapati (lord of compassion), dala/ dev (merciful god),
karima, rahima (the merciful one), etc., have been used as attributive
names of God (GG, 249, 991, 1027, 727). In Sikh ethics, too, daya is
inter alia, a basic moral requirement, a moral vow. “Keep your heart
content and cherish compassion for all beings; this way alone can your
holy vow be fulfilled” (GG 299).

39, At the human level, one can comprehend feeling of another’s
anguish, but as a theological doctrine it is to risk allowing suffering in
God's life. This has often caused much controversy in theological circles. :

‘God does not suffer in the sense of pain from evil as evil, but may suffer

compassion (daya) as bearing the pain of others to relieve them (of pain
as also of evil). That is why at the time of Babar’s invasion of India, Guru
Nanak, when he witnessed the suffering of people, complained to God:-

“Eti mar pai kurlane tain ki dardu‘na ala”

‘So much agony were they put through

So much anguish did they suffer—

Were you not, O God, moved to compassion?’ (GG, 360)

40. Daya is a virtue of the mind. In Indian thought, virtues are .
classified into: - “

(a) Those of the body:-
(i) Dana (charity).
(ii) Paritrana (succouring those in distress),

(iii) Paricharana (social service),

54

(b) Those of speech:-
(i) satya (veracity).
(ii) Aftovachana (beneficial speech).
(ili) priyavachana (sweet speech).
(iv) svadhyaya (reciting of Scriptures).

(c) Those of the mind which, besides daya, a/so include
aparigraha (unworldliness) and sraddha (reverence and piety).

41. In Sikh thought daya is considered the highest virtue:
“Athsathi tirath sagal punn jia daia parvenu”
‘The merit of pilgrimages of holy places sixty-eight,
and that of other virtues besides,
equal not compassion to living beings.’ (GG, 136)

Daya is, in reality, true action or action par excellence (karn/ sar) as
are truth and contentment, the other two high virtues (GG, 51).

Death

42. DEATH is the primordial mystery and one of the cardinal conditions
of existence. Scientifically, death is defined as “the permanent cessation
of the vital function in the bodies of animals and plants” or, simply, as the
end of life caused by senescence or by stoppage of the means of
sustenance to body cells. In Sikhism the universal fact of mortality is
juxtaposed to immortality (amarapad) as the ultimate objective
(paramartha) of life. As a biological reality death is the inevitable destiny
of everyone, Even the divines and prephets have no immunity from it.
Mortality reigns over the realms of the gods as well.

‘Death will inevitably strike

Even in the land of Lord Indra

Nor is Brahma’s domain free from it.
Likewise is Lord Siva’s world

decreed to come to naught.'(GG. 237)

55

43. We all entered this world “with death as our written fate” (GG,
876), says Guru Nanak. Death cannot be apprehended apart from life.
Contemplating both together, one truly comprehends the phenomenon of
life and death (maran jivan ki sojhi pae).

44. A significant term used for death is ka/ which has a dual meaning.
It connotes death as well as time. Both connotations intertwine
theologically. Kal is often denoted as jam kal (jama=yamma, the Vedic
God of Death). Day in and day out it gnaws at the fabric of life. But man
remains ignorant and perceives it not.That ka/ is constantly nibbling at life
brings home to one the ephemerality of existence and therefore the
necessity of making the most of it. If life has been lived in accord with
acceptable laws it will win approval.

‘Death is the privilege of men
Who live life positively.’ (GG, 579)

45. Death is legitimated by the ends it serves—surmounting the throes
of transmigration or sacrifice for an ideal or laying down of one’s life in a
righteous cause. Such a death carries one beyond the realm of Time into
the realm of Eternity (akal). Eternity does not signify extended Time, but
the state beyond Time, and therefore beyond ‘mortality. Participation in
~ Eternity does not lie hereafter. It is the state of immortality (amarapad)
here in life which is liberation (muktf) from the throes of Time. That
signifies the death of Death itself (ka/ kale). ~

46. To attain this state of immortality one need not necessarily pass
through the portals of biological death. This state can be attained while
one is still alive. To achieve this, however, one has to die to oneself. This
state is attainable by contemplating the Self by the grace of the Divine:-

‘As by the Lord’s favour one contemplates the self,
So one learns to die while still living."(GG. 935)

47. Dying to oneself has several. kindred nuances in Sikh theology.
Spoken, not only in terms of decimation of man and even of egoity
(haumai), this is also the connotation of dying in sabda (the Holy Word):-

‘He who ceases in sabda

His death is blessed.'(GG, 1067)

56

4

48. Another type of “blessed” dying is through sacrifice. When he
initiated the order of the Khalsa in 1699, Guru Gobind Singh invited Sikhs
to offer him their own heads. Five volunteered in response to the call,
The baptismal initiation ceremony fashioned after that event even now
encapsulates its symbolic sacrifice. The initiate is required to die to his
past samskaras and be born into the Guru’s family.

“The kindred spirits who
Served their Lord while they lived
Kept Him in mind while departing,’
(GG, 1000)

49. Yearn for their departure to their ‘real home’ (nij ghar) where they

have a tryst with their Divine Spouse. At that time they invoke the
blessings of one and all:-

‘Predestined is the hour of my nuptials
Come ye, my friends, and anoint the doorsteps.
Men are thus advised to meditate on Him who sends the call:
May the day of union for each drrive’
(GG, 12)
Five Evils( Kam, Karodh, Lobh, Moh and Hanker)

50. FIVE EVILS or pancadokh or panj vikar as they are referred to in
Sikh Scripture, the Guru Granth Sahib, are, according to Sikhism, the five
major weaknesses of the human personality at variance with its spiritual
essence. The common evils far exceed in number, but a group of five of
them came to be identified because of the obstruction they are believed
to cause in man's pursuit of the moral and spiritual path. The group of
five evils comprises kama, krodha, lobha, moha, and ahankara (kam,
karodh, lobh, moh and hankar, in Punjabi); translated into English these
words mean lust, wrath, greed, attachment and egoity, respectively. The
word ‘evil’ here may be understood to represent the connotation of
Punjabi pap (sin), dokh (defect), or kilbikh (defilement).

57

51. The number five (panj, Panca) Is traditional and has been used ina
Variety of contexts, One comes across repeated references to pentads in
philosophy, religion, ethics, mythology and history of India. The god Siva
has five faces, hence his name Pancanana; the Buddha analysed human
Personality into five aggregates (panca-skandha) and laid down five moral
precepts (pancasila): the Upanisads speak of the five fires (pancagni) and
five sheaths or wrappers investing the self (pancakosah); Jainism has its
five vows (pancavratas), and the Yoga system its five abstentions
(yamas) and five observations (niyamas); five are the organs of sense,
five the organs of action, five the objects of Sense, five the gross and

52. The early Vedic literature bears no reference to the concept of 'five

Buddhistic Upanisads such as the Prasna, Svetasvatara, Aitareya, Isa and
Mundaka. The last-named text refers to 'the sages whose defilements
have been destroyed' (ksinadosah), although it does not enumerate the
‘defilements',

53. Long before these later Upanisads, however, leaders of Sramanic
philosophers had expounded soteriological techniques in which eradication

54. The old Pali texts contain three lists of evils and factors which
obstruct meditation and moral perfection. The list of five 'hindrances'
(nivaranas) consists of sensuous desire, ill will, sloth and torpor,
restlessness and sceptical doubt. These hindrances blind man's mental
vision and make concentration difficult. The list of ten ‘'fetters’
(sanyojanas), which bind beings to sansara, comprises of ‘belief in a
permanent individuality, sceptical doubt, belief in the efficacy of mere
moral observances and rituals, sensual passion, il! will, desire for
existence in the material world, desire for existence in the immaterial
world, conceit, restlessness and nescience’,

55. The first two in the list of five hindrances, viz. sensuous desire
(kamacchanda) and ill will or malice are the same as the first two in the
list of five evils mentioned in the Sikh canon. Likewise, belief in a
permanent individuatity (satkayadrsti), sensual passion (kamaraga), itl
will, conceit (mana) and nescience (avidya), included in the Buddhist list
of ten fetters, are comparable to egoity, lust, wrath, pride and delusion or
attachment of Sikh enumeration.

56. The third Buddhist list of ten ‘defilements' (Pali kilesa, Punjabi
kalesh and Skt. klesa), includes the follgwing: greed (/obha), hatred
(dosa), delusion (moha), conceit (mana), false views, sceptical doubt,
sloth, distraction, shamelessness and recklessness. In this list, again, the
first four defilements are nearly identical with those included in the list of
‘five evils' minus lust (kama). This last evil is mentioned separately and
repeatedly in the Buddhist scriptures in Pali as well as in Sanskrit.
Similarly wrath (krodha) is mentioned separately as a powerful enemy of
holy life. Early Buddhist sources describe the triad of lobha, dosa (dvesa),
and moha as the three roots of evij (akusala-mula), One of the standard
Buddhist words for evil is klesa which may be translated as ‘defilement' or
‘depravity’. A list of six defilements is found in some Buddhist Sanskrit
sources and includes passion (raga), ill will (pratigha), conceit (mana),
nescience (avidya), false view (kudrst/}, and sceptical doubt (vichikitsa).,

57. The Jaina sources also contain detaiis concerning evils and
defilements. All the five evils of the Sikh list are found repeatedly
mentioned in the sacred literature of Jainism, The Avasyakasutra has a
list of eighteen sins which includes among others wrath (krodha), conceit,
delusion (maya), greed, and it will. The standard Jaina term for evil is
‘dirt’ or 'passion' (kasaya). The Dasavaikalikasutra states that four
kasayas, viz. wrath, conceit, delusion and greed, cause rebirth. The

Uttaradhyayanasutra mentions moha, trsna (synonym of kama) and lobha
as the sources of sorrow.

58. The Yogasutra (II. 3) has a list of five defilements or hindrances
called panca-klesah. These are nescience (avidya), egoity (asmita),
passion (raga), ill will (dvesa) and the will to live (abhinivesa). It should
be pointed out here that avidya equals moha; asmita is identical with
gahankara; raga is similar to kama; dvesa is not different from krodha;
and abhinivesa belongs to the category of /obha understood as continuous
desire for existence in sansar.

99, The Bhagavad-gita mentions all the five evils although they are not
enumerated as forming a pentad. The text mentions Kama as desire or
wish and at one point it is identified with krodha. Besides kama and
krodha the Bhagavad-gita mentions passion (raga), ill will, attachment,
delusion, egoity, greed, conceit and nescience {ajnana), and employs
_ terms such as papa, dosa and kalmasa for impurities or defilements. In
one verse hypocrisy, arrogance, conceit, wrath, harsh speech and
nescience are described as demoniac qualities. Medieval Buddhist, Jainist,
and Brahmanical authors of religious and philosophical works continued to
discuss the meaning, nature and methods of eradicating the five and
more evils. The Tantric adepts (siddhas) recommended rather radical
techniques of combating the evil psychological forces, especially ‘through
the method of ‘conquering passions through passions’. Reference may be
made here to Tulasidasa who, in a series of quadriparti verses (chaupais)
in his Ramacharitamanasa, acknowledges the universality of kama,
krodha, lobha, moha, mana and trsna which afflict not only men but also
the gods. ,

60. There is no philosophical or theological explication of the five evils,
collectively or individually, in Sikh Scripture, but man is repeatedly
warned against them. They have been called diseases or maladies which
afflict human beings with disastrous effects. The evil pentad is however
mentioned at numerous places in the Holy Book. In at least five instances
the list consists of the following: kam, krodh, lobh, moh and abhiman or
ahankar. At one place instead of moh and abhiman we have mad and
ninda. Here the word mad may be interpreted in the sense of ‘intoxication
born of egoity'. The word ninda means slander. In two of the seven
instances cited here the members of the evil pentad are called ‘five
thieves’ (panch-chor). In a hymn by Kabir the list has trishna (craving),
kam, krodh, mad and matsar as the five evils, The word trishna (Skt.
trsna) means craving or desire, while the word matsar means jealousy.

Often the five evils are referred to as ‘the five’ (panch) or ‘all the five’
(sare panch). At places the five organs of sense (jnanendriyas) are also
often referred to as 'the five’.

61. One, two, three or four of the five cardinal evils are repeatedly
mentioned almost throughout the body of the Sikh canon. The triad kam,
krodh and lobh finds as frequent a mention as the triad kam, krodh and
ahankar or moh, lobh and ahankar. Among the five evils the one that is
condemned more than the others is ahankar. When only two of the five
are mentioned, the pair consists either of kam and krodh, or of moh and
guman, or of jobh and moh; when a group of four out of the five evils is
cited, it usually consists of the first four, kam, krodh, fobh and moh. Since
the Sikh canon is a composite text containing the religious poetry not only
of the Gurus but also of several saints and Sufis from various regions,
synonyms, occasionally from different languages, occur. Thus /obh is also
called /jalach; man is called garab (Skt. garva) and guman; moh is also
called bharam (Skt. bhrama).

62. A word of most frequent occurrence is haumai. It is perhaps derived
from aham, 'I' or egoity, the essential element of ego; hankar, ahankar
are its semantic cognates. The word man is employed in a double sense;
sometimes it is clearly used in the sense of ‘honour’ or ‘respect’. In most
cases, however, it is synonymous with abhiman.

63. Although it is permissible to identify hauma/ with ahankar, the fact
that hauma? is not included in the evil pentad and yet comes in for the
strongest censure in the Scripture would lead to the conclusion that it is
regarded as a major evil in addition to those forming the pentad. It may
be added that haumai or egoity, seif-centredness, the personality system,
the belief in one’s individual existence, is the basis of all the other evils.
From this standpoint, ahankar may be reckoned as an offshoot of haumai.
The assertion or affirmation of ‘I' runs counter to the affirmation of
'Thou'; the consciousness of 'self existence’ or ‘one’s own existence’ (sva-
bhava or atma-bhava) is diametrically opposed to the consciousness of

God's existence. In a system in which the sole reality of God (ik onkar) is
the first principle, there can be no reom for the reality of an ‘individual

existence’ or ‘one's own existence’ apart from or along with the existence
of God. To say that God alone is the reality means that there is no other
reality that belongs to someone else, and that there is no someone else
who can claim an independent reality of his own. The truth is that there is
no truth in haumal.

Saas

cuter fea
wow wow By

64. Nevertheless, this unreal reality, this false truth—haumaj—
apparently exists. It is unreal and false from the standpoint of God who is
the only absolute Reality; it is real and true from the standpoint of the
fettered creatures coursing in sansar. These creatures have assumed a

Scripture Says: "Haumai jai la kant SaMai—God is realized only when one
eradicates egoity" (GG, 750}; literally, ‘(one) merges into (one's) Lord
only when (her/his) egoity has disappeared’.

of the pentad. No headway can be made towards God-realization without
discarding the cardinal! evils. Kabir says, "He alona cherishes the Lord's
feet who is rid of desire, wrath, greed and attachment—kamy, krodhu
lobhu mohy bibarjit haripadu chinai soi ( GG, 1123),

67. Loving devotion (bhagati, bhakti) to God is, according to Sikhism,
the way to ultimate release. One can love God only when one has
annihilated Self-love; this means that the devotee must be humble and

62

awareness of God (simran) is the panacea for all ills. He who enshrines
the Lord's lotus feet in his heart destroys sins of many existences.
Devotion to God eradicates the evils in an instant and purifies the body
(GG, 245). The destruction of evils may be viewed both as a cause and
consequence of the practice of nam simran. Awareness of God's presence
comes only when lust, wrath, avarice, attachment and egoity have
departed from the devotee; when the devotee lives in constant awareness
of God, the evils touch him not. Such a person is unaffected by pleasure
and pain, for he has freed himself from eviis such as fobh, moh and
abhiman. Guru Tegh Bahadur describes such a sage as one liberated
while still alive and calls him an image of God on earth (GG, 1426-27),

68. Another way of overcoming Aaumai and other evils is to keep the
company of the saints (sant, sadh) who radiate virtuous qualities. One
kills lust, wrath, greed and other depravities of the evil age (kali-kales) by
taking refuge in the sangat, the holy fellowship. It is by discarding the
most powerful of evils, egoity, that one can get admission to this sacred
society. Egoity ceases as one takes to the company of the holy (GG, 271).
A third method of overcoming the evils is to submit oneself to the
instruction of the spiritual preceptor (guru). He who would overcome the
five evils must follow his teaching. The wisdom obtained from the
preceptor is like a swift sword (kharagu karara) which cuts through
confusion, infatuation, avarice and egaity (GG, 1087). One celebrates
God's virtues through the favour of the sage (sant prasad/) and destroys
lust, anger and insanity born of egoism (unmad). In Guru Nanak's Sidh
Gosti it is stated that without the preceptor one's efforts bear no fruit. The
importance of living up to the instruction of the holy preceptor can be
judged from the concept of the 'Guru-oriented person’ (gurmukh) so
central to the Sikh moral system. A gurmukh is one who has turned his
face towards the Guru, that Is to say, a person who by practising what the
Guru teaches has freed himself from the depravities and lives in the
Divine presence. He achieves this position by conquering the evils under
the guidance of the Guru and ever remains in tune with the Supreme
Reality.

FIVE KHANDS (Dharam khand, gian khand, saram khand. karam
khand, and sach khand)

69. FIVE KHANDS (Ram Singh) or Padj Khands, signifies in the Sikh
tradition the five stages of spiritual progress leading man to the Ultimate
Truth. The supporting text is a fragment from Guru Nanak’s Japu, stanzas
34 to 37. The Five Realms enumerated therein are dharam khand, the

63

realm of righteous action (pauri 34), gian khand, the realm of knowledge

(pauri 35), saram khand, the realm of spiritual endeavour (pauri 36),
karam khand, the realm of grace, and sach khand the realm of Truth
(pauri 37). The concept of the spiritual journey running into several
stages is found in other religious traditions as well. The number of stages
and the nomenclature may vary, but the broad features of the journey
remain the same. The seven muqamat of the Sufis, the eight angas of
Patanja! yoga, the five kosas of Vedanta and dash bhumis of Buddhism
run on parallet lines though they are embedded each in a different cultural
milieu,

70. The Panj Khands in the Japu delineate the different stages of
Spiritual ascent tracing the evolution of human consciousness on different
planes involving man‘s thought, emotions and action. Though Guru Nanak
does not explicitly deal with these transformations and only touches upon
the core characteristics of each stage (Khand), yet the emphasis on one
aspect does not exclude the others. In each stage, the status or position
of the individual is set forth in a social setting. The seeker is not
conceived of as a recluse or ascetic: social obligations and moral qualities
form an essential core of the spiritual path. The empirical mind is first
emancipated from the grip of desire and purified by a rigorous moral
discipline. When it fearns to stand still, it is brought to the Divine Portal
which it can enter only with the divine grace. There it finds itself face to
face with the Truth Eternal, i.e. God.

71. The delineation of the Panj Khands is preceded by two introductory
remarks in the two preceding stanzas. First, there is the term pavatian,
.@. rungs of a ladder, denoting stages of the mystical ascent. Guru Nanak
relates this ascent to the constant remembrance of His Name. Then
eccurs another insight which implies that all the endeavours that the
spiritual aspirant makes and all the means that he employs during these
endeavours have their ultimate source in divine grace without which he
may not even feel the initia} impulse towards spiritual fife,

72. The first stage is the dharam khand.-“The earth exists for dharma to
be practised.” The word dharam has been employed in the sense of duty.
Duty is usually performed either out of a sense of social responsibility or
through moral awareness. Guru Nanak links this sense of duty to man’s
consciousness of divine justice. This is the stage in which a sense of
inquisitiveness is aroused in the mind of the devotee who is now no
longer a casual onlooker of the world around but can perceive the divine
PUrpose behind the creation of this planet of ours, the earth, which is set

64

in the cosmic cradle of time and Space and is sustained by the vital
elements. Man has been placed in this world to respond to the Creator's
Purpose, In His court, he will be judged according to his moral response.

73. The next is gian khand. “In the realm of knowledge, knowledge is
ignited, i.e. illumination dawns.” The seeker here becomes aware of the
universe and the mystery of existence. Through the creation, he gains
knowledge of the Creator from whom it emanates. Knowiedge here is not
merely intellectua! or sensual; it is intuitive awareness, a spiritual
consciousness which expands the vision of the seeker. His sense of
wonder is born not merely of his awareness of the many forms of life or
the ordered movement of numerous celestial spheres, but of his
perception of God who is the sole force behind all. In front of this timitless
variety of cosmic life, he feels humble. This simultaneous experience of
expansion of vision and of the sense of humility leads to vismaya or
vismad (wonder).

74, Saram Khand is the sphere of spiritual endeavour. Here man strives
against the last remnants of his ego which still afflict him in spite of his
experiencing strong emotions of humility in the gian khand. If the sense
of awe and wonder is not accompanied or followed by discipline, the
experience might become a mere emotion, something remembered with
nostalgia but having no permanent worth. To become worthy of receiving
the divine grace, one must chisel one’s surati (consciousness) which is a
unifying thread for all human faculties. This chiselling of intellect and
wisdom would erase even the subtlest layers of ego from one’s mind.

75. Karam Khand (the realm of grace) is the sphere where reigns the
Divine grace. The process of liberation with grace initiated is now brought
to completion. All sense of dualism ends. The devotee is one with the Lord
and with those who have attained this state of bliss. One reaches here
only after achieving a heroic victory over the evils. Yet he is not a passive
devotee, but a man of awakened courage and great deeds.

76. The final stage of spiritual ascent, i.e, sach khand (the realm of the
Truth), defies description. “Hard as steel is the story of this state to
narrate.” Described as the abode of the Nirankar, the Formless One, sach
khand is not a geographical spot, but the final state of the evolution of
human consciousness. One can only experience it, but not describe it, for
here words cease to have any meaning and no analogies can help in
describing the Unique. Here in the Divine Court, the perfect ones rejoice
in His presence. It is from here that His Will (hakam) goes out to the
universe, and the liberated, grace-filled souls perform it joyously and
Py
p
b
>

65

effortlessly. The devotee becomes one with Him and realizes Him as a
unifying force working through all objects of His creation, This way he
attains to the non-spatial sach khand and to the Dweller therein, the
Nirankar, who is nowhere outside his own heart.

God in Sikhism

77. God in Sikhism a term used to denote any object of worship or
evocation, signifies the belief of most modern religions in the existence of
a Supreme Being who is the source and support of the spatio-temporal
material world. Theologians remember Him by the name of God. The
fundamental belief of Sikhism, too, is that God exists, not merely as an

Arjan, Nanak Vv, Says, "God is beyond colour and form, yet His presence is
clearly visible" (GG, 74), and again, "Nanak's Lord transcends the world
as well as the Scriptures of the east and the west, and yet he is clearly
Manifest" (GG, 397). In any Case, knowledge of the ultimate Reality is not
a matter for reason; it comes by revelation of Himself through nadar or
grace and by anubhava or mystica] experience, Says Guru Nanak, “budhi

He is met, when He pleases, through devotion) " (GG, 436),

78. Sikhism as a religion is uncompromisingly monotheistic. The Gurus
have described God In numerous ways in their hymns included in the

basic formula of the faith, viz. Ik oankar satinamu karta purakhy nirbhau
nirvairu akal murati ajuni saibhan gurprasadi, is the "One Supreme Being,
the Immutable and Eternal Name, the Creative Masculine Principle,
Without fear and Without rancour, the Timeless Verity, Unincarnated and
Self-Existent, known through His grace." Oankar is a variation of the
mystic monosyllable Om (also known as anahata nada, the unstruck

66

time. Transcendence and immanence are two aspects of the same single
Supreme Reality. He is immanent in the entire creation, but the creation
as a whole fails to contain Him fully. As says Guru Tegh Bahadur, Nanak
IX, "He has himself spread out His Own maya which He Himself oversees;
many different forms He assumes in many colours, yet he stays
independent of all" (GG, 537).

79, God is Karta Purakh, the Creator-Person. He created the spatio-
temporal universe not from some pre-existing physical element, but from
His own Self. Universe is His own emanation. It is not maya or illusion but
is real (satf) because, as say Guru Arjan, “True is He and true is His
creation [because] ali has emanated from God Himself” (GG 294), But
God is not identical with the universe. The latter exists and is contained
in Him and not vice versa. God is immanent in the created world, but is
not limited by it. “Many times He expands Himself into such worlds but He
ever remains the same One Ekankar” (GG, 276). Even at one time "there
are hundreds of thousands of skies and nether regions" (GG, 5). Included
in sach khand, the figurative abode of God, there are countless regions
and universes" (GG, 8). Creation is "His sport which He Himself
witnesses, and when He rolls up the sport, He is His sole Self again" (GG,
292). He Himself is the Creator, Sustainer and the Destroyer.

80. What is the Creator's purpose in creating the universe? It is not for
man to enquire or judge the purpose of His Creator. To quote Guru Arjan
again, "The created cannot have a measure of the Creator; what He wills,
O Nanak, happens" (GG, 285). For the Sikhs, the Creation is His pleasure
and play "When the showman beat His drum, the whole creation came out
to witness the show; and when He puts aside his disguise, He rejoices in
His original solitude" (GG, 174, 291, 655, 736),

81. Purakhu added to Karta in the Mul Mantra is the Punjabi form of
Sanskrit purusa, which literally means, besides man, male or person, "the
Primeval man as the soul and original source of the universe; the
personal and animating Principle; the supreme Being or Soul of the
universe." Purakh in Mul Mantra is, therefore, none other than God the
Creator. The term has nothing to do with the purusa of the Sankhya
school of Indian philosophy where it is the spirit as a passive spectator of
prakriti or creative force.

* 82. That God is nirbhau (without fear) and nirvair (without rancour) is

obvious enough as He has no sarik or rival. But the terms have other
connotations, too. Nirbhau not only indicates fearlessness but also the
absence of fearfuiness. It aiso implies sovereignty and unquestioned

>

— ey

67

exercise of Will. Similarly, nirvair implies, besides absence of enmity, the
positive attributes of compassion and impartiality. Together the two terms
mean that God loves His handiwork and is the Dispenser of impartial
justice, dharam-niau. Guru Ram Das, Nanak IV, says: "Why should we be
afraid, with the True One being the judge. True is the True One's justice"
(GG, 84).

83. God is Aka/ Murati, the Eternal Being. The timelessness involved in
the negative epithet aka/ has made it popular in Sikh tradition as one of
the names of God, the Timeless One, as in Akal Purakh or in the slogan
Sat Sri Akal (Satya Sri Akal). One of the most sacred shrines of the Sikhs
is the Akal Takht, the Eternal Throne, at Amritsar. Murati here does not
mean form, figure, image or idol. Sikhism expressly forbids idolatry or
image-worship in any form. God is called Nirankar, the Formless One,
although it is true that all forms are the manifestations of Nirankar. Bhai
Gurdas, the earliest expounder and the copyist of the original recension of
Guru Granth Sahib, says: "Nirankar akaru hari joti sarup anup dikhaia
(The Formless One having created form manifested His wondrous
refulgence" (Varan, XII. 17). Murati in the Mul Mantra, therefore, signifies
verity or manifestation of the Timeless and Formiless One.

84. God is Ajuni, Unincarnated, and Saibhan (Sanskrit svayambhu),
Self-existent. The Primal Creator Himself had no creator. He simply is,
has ever been and shall ever be by Himself, Ajuni aiso affirms the Sikh
rejection of the theory of divine incarnation. Guru Arjan says: "Man
misdirected by false belief indulges in falsehood; God is free from birth
and death. May that mouth be scorched which says that God is
incarnated" (GG, 1136).

85. The Mul Mantra ends with gurprasadi, meaning thereby that
realization of God comes through Guru's grace. "Guru" in Sikh theology
appears in three different but allied connotations, viz. God, the ten Sikh
Gurus, the enlightened ones and enlighteners, and the gur-shabad or
Guru's utterances as preserved in the Guru Granth Sahib. Of God's grace,
Gurus’ instruction and guidance and the scriptural sabad (Sanskrit, sabda,
lit. Word), the first is the most important, because, as nothing happens
without God's will or pleasure, His grace is essential to making a person
inclined towards a desire and search for union with Him,

86, God in Sikhism is thus depicted in three distinct aspects, viz. God in
Himself, God in relation to creation, and God in relation to man. God by
himself is the one Ultimate, Transcendent Reality, Nirguna (without
attributes), Timeless, Boundless, Formless, Ever-existent, Immutable,

68

Ineffable, All-by Himself and even Unknowable in His entirety. The only
nomenclatures that can rightly be applied to Him in this state of sunn
(Sanskrit, sunya or void) are Brahma and Parbrahma (Sanskrit,
Parbrahman) or the pronouns He and Thou. During a discourse with
Siddhas, Hindu recluses, Guru Nanak in reply to a question as to where
the Transcendent God was before the stage of creation replies, "To think
of the Transcendent Lord in that state is to enter the realm of wonder.
Even at that stage of sunn, he permeated all that Void" (GG, 940). This is
the state of God's sunn samadhi, self-absorbed trance.

87. When it pleases God, He becomes sarguna (Sanskrit, saguna, with
attributes) and manifests Himself in creation. He becomes immanent in
His created universe, which is His own emanation, an aspect of Himself.
As says Guru Amar Das, Nanak III, "This (so-called) poison, the world,
that you see is God's picture; it is God's outline that we see" (GG, 922),
Most names of God are His attributive, action-related signifiers, kirtam
nam (GG, 1083) or karam nam (Dasam Granth, Japu). Ged in the Sikh
Scripture has been referred to by several names, picked from indian and
semitic traditions. He is called in terms of human relations as father,
mother, brother, relation, friend, lover, beloved, husband. Other names,
expressive of His supremacy, are thakur, prabhu, svami, ‘sah, patsah,
sahib, sain (Lord, Master). Some traditional names are ram, narayan,
_ govind, gopal, allah, khuda, Even the negative terms such as nirankar,
niranjan et al, are as much related to attributes as are the positive terms
like data, datar, karta, kartar, dayal, kripal, qadir, karim, etc. Some
terms peculiar to Sikhism are nam (lit. name), sabad (lit. word) and
Vahiguru (lit. Wondrous Master}. While nam and sabad are mystical terms
standing for the Divine manifestation and are used as substitute terms for
the Supreme Being, Vahiguru is an ejaculatory phrase expressing awe,
wonder and ecstatic joy of the worshipper as he comprehends the
immenseness and grandeur of the Lord and His Creation.

88. Immanence or All-pervasiveness of God, however, does not limit or
in any way affect His transcendence. He is Transcendent and Immanent
at the same time. The Creation Is His //fa or cosmic play. He enjoys it,
pervades it, yet Himself remains unattached. Guru Arjan describes Him in
several hymns as “Unattached and Unentangied in the midst of all" (GG,
102, 294, 296); and "Amidst all, yet outside of all, free from love and
hate" (GG, 784-85). Creation is His manifestation, but, being conditioned
‘by space and time, it provides only a partial and imperfect glimpse of the
Timeless and Boundless Supreme Being.

69

we

89, That God is both Transcendent and Immanent does not mean that
these are two phases of God one following the other. God is One, and He
is both nirguna and sarguna. "Nirguna sargunu hari hari mera, (God, my
God is both with and without attributes)," sang Guru Arjan (GG, 98). Guru
Amar Das also had said, "Nirguna sarguna ape soi (He Himself is with as
well as without attributes) " (GG, 128), Transcendence and Immanence
are two aspects of the same Supreme Reality.

90. The Creator also sustains His Creation compassionately and-
benevoiently. "My Lord is ever Fresh and ever Bountiful" (GG, 660); "He
is the eradicator of the pain and sorrow of the humble" (GG, 263-64). The
universe is created, sustained and moved according to His Aukam or
Divine Will, and Divine purpose. "The inscrutable Aukam is the source of
all forms, ail creatures. . . All are within the ambit of Aukam; there is
nothing outside of it." (GG, p. 1). Another principle that regulates the
created beings is karma (actions, deeds). Simply stated, it is the law of
cause and effect. The popular dictum "As one sows so shali one reap" is
stressed again and again in the Guru Granth Sahib (GG, 134,176, 309,
316, 366, 706, 730).

—

) 91. The created world though real is not eternal. Whenever God desires,
it merges back into. His Timeless and Formless Self. Guru Gobind Singh
calls this process of creation and dissolution udkarkh (Sanskrit,
} utkarsana) and akarkh (Sanskrit, akarsana), respectively: "Whenever
} you, O Creator, cause udkarkh (increase, expansion), the creation
assumes the boundless body; whenever you effect akarkh (attraction,
contraction), all corporeal existence merges in you" (Benati Chaupai).
} This process of creation and dissolution has been repeated God alone
knows for how many times. A passage in the Sukhmani by Guru Arjan
visualizes the infinite field of creation thus:-

‘Millions are the mines of life; millions the spheres;
Millions are the regions above; millions the regions below;
Millions are the species taking birth.

By diverse means does He spread Himself.

Again and again did He expand Himself thus,

But He ever remains the One Ekankar.

Countless creatures of various kinds

70

Come out of Him and are absorbed back.
None can know the limit of His Being;
He, the Lord, O Nanak! is all in all Himself.'(GG. 275-76)

92. Man, although an infinitesimal part of God's creation, yet stands
apart from it insofar as it is the only species blessed with reflection, moral
sense and potentiality for understanding matters metaphysical. In
Sikhism, human birth is both a special! privilege for the soul and a rare
chance for the realization of union with God. Man is lord of earth, as Guru
Arjan says, "Of all the eight million and four hundred thousand species,
God conferred superiority on man" (GG, 1075), and "All other species are
your (man's) water-bearers; you have hegemony over this earth" (GG,
374). But Guru also reminds that "now that you (the soul) have got a
human body, this is your turn to unite with God" (GG, 12, 378). Guru
Nanak had warned, "Listen, listen to my advice, O my mind! only good
deed shall endure, and there may not be another chance" (GG, 154). So,
realization of God and a reunion of atma (soul) with paramatma
(Supreme Soul, God) are the ultimate goals of human life. The
achievement ultimately rests on nadar. (God's grace), but man has to
strive in order to deserve His grace. As a first step, he should have faith
in and craving for the Lord. He should believe that God is near him, rather
within his self, and not far away. He is to seek Him in his self. Guru Nanak
says: "Your beloved is close to you, O foolish bride! What are you
searching outside?” (GG, 722), and Guru Amar Das reassures: "Recognize
yourself, O mind! You are the light manifest. Rejoice in Guru's instruction
that God: is always with (in) you. If you recognize your Self, you shalt
know the Lord and shall get the knowledge of life and death" (GG, 441),
The knowledge of the infinitesimal nature of his self when. compared to
the immenseness of God and His creation would insti! humility in man and
would rid him of his ego (a sense of I, my and mine) which is "the
greatest malady man suffers from" (GG, 466, 589, 1258) and the arch-
enemy of nam or path to God-Reaiization (GG, 560). Having surrendered
his ego and having an intense desire to reach his goal (the realization of
Reality), the seeker under Guru's instruction (gurmat!) becomes a
gurmukh or person looking guruward. He meditates upon nam or sabda,
the Divine Word, while yet leading life as a householder, earning through
honest labour, sharing his victuals with the needy, and performing self-
abnegating deeds of service. Sikhism condemns ritualism. Worship of
God in the Sikh way of life consists in reciting gurbani or holy texts and
#)

oe #

7]

meditation on nam, solitary or in Sangat or congregation, kirtan or singing
of scriptural hymns in praise of God, and ardas or prayer in supplication.

Importance of Gurdwara

93. GURDWARA meaning the Guru's portal or the Guru's abode, is the
name given to a Sikh place of worship. The common transiation of the
term as temple is not Satisfactory for, their faith possessing no sacrificial

gurdwara is the Presiding presence in it of Sikh Scripture, the Guru
Granth Sahib. Ending the line of personal Gurus, Guru Gobind Singh

f

Nanak X, had installed the sacred volume in 1708 as his eternal

Successor. The Holy Book has since been the Guru for the Sikhs and it
Must reign over all Sikh places of worship where religious ceremony
focuses around it. The basic condition for a Sikh place to be so known is
the installation in it of the Guru Granth Sahib. Every Sikh place by that
token is the house of the Guru. Hence the name Gurdwara (gur+dwara=
the guru's door).

94. A second characteristic of a gurdwara js its being a public place
open to alf devotees to Pray individually or to assemble in congregation.
Its external distinguishing mark is the Nishan Sahib or the Sikh flag,
saffron or blue in colour, that flies day and night atop the building, or,
More often, separately close to it. In early Sikhism, the place used for
congregational prayers was called dharamsala, the abode of dharma,

in them to repeat God's Name, and to recite His praise. He himself
established one at Kartarpur on the bank of the River Ravi where he
Settled down at the end of his extensive preaching tours, "I have set up a
dharamsal of truth," sang Guru Arjan (1563-1606). "I seek the Sikhs of
the Guru (to congregate therein) so that I may serve them and bow at
their feet" (GG, 73). In the time of Guru Hargobind (1595-1644),
dharamsais began to be called gurdwaras. The change of nomenclature
was significant. Guru Arjan had compiled in 1604 a Book, pothi or granth
(later Guru Granth Sahib) of holy hymns. Besides his own, he had
included in it the compositions of his four spiritual predecessors and of
some of the Indian saints and sufis. "The pothi is the abode of the
Divine," said he (GG, 1226). This first copy of the Granth he installed in
the central Siich shrine, the Harimandar, at Amritsar. Copies of the Granth

72

began to be piously transcribed. The devotees carried them on their
heads for installation in their respective dharamsals. Reverently, the Book
was called the Granth Sahib and was treated as a sacred embodiment of
the Gurus' revealed utterances. The dharamsa/ where Granth Sahib was
kept came to be called gurdwara. The designation became universal after
the guruship passed to the holy Book, although the central shrine at
Amritsar continued to be called Harimandar or Darbar Sahib.

95. During the second half of the eighteenth century and after, as the
Sikhs acquired territory, gurdwaras sprang up in most of the Sikh
habitations and on sites connected with the lives of the Gurus and with
events in Sikh history. Most of the historical gurdwaras were endowed by
the ruling chiefs and nobility with liberal grants of land. This well-
intentioned philanthropy, however, in many cases led to the rise of
hereditary priesthood, which was brought to an end through a sustained
agitation culminating in securing from the Punjab Legislative Council
legislation called the Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925, providing for the
management of the major historical Sikh shrines by a body known as the
Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee elected through adult
franchise under government auspices. This kind of democratic control is a
unique ecclesiastical feature. Most of the shrines not covered by the
Gurdwaras Act are administered by committees chosen by local sangats.
Men and women of good standing in the Sikh community may be elected
to the gurdwara committee and anyone, male or female, may become
president. As Sikhism has no priesthood, the Shiromani Gurdwara
Parbandhak Committee provides guidance to the community in religious
matters.

96. The main function of the gurdwara is to provide Sikhs with a
meeting-place for worship. This mainly consists of listening to the words
of the Guru Granth Sahib, singing them to musical accompaniment and
hearing them expounded in katha, or lectures: and sermons. The
gurdwara also serves as a community centre, a school, a guest house for
pilgrims and travellers, occasionally a clinic, and a base for local.
charitable activities. Apart from morning and evening services, the
gurdwaras hold special congregations to mark important anniversaries on
the Sikh calendar. They become scenes of much éclat and festivity when
celebrations in honour. of the birth anniversaries of the Gurus and of the
Khalsa take place. The aspect of Sikhism most closely associated with the
gurdwara, other than worship, is the institution of Guru ka Langar or free
community kitchen which encourages commensality. Seva or voluntary
service in Guru ka Langar is considered by Sikhs a pious duty.

97, The gurdwara and its hospitality are open to non-Sikhs as well as to
members of the faith. The Sikh rahit maryada or code of conduct,
however, contains certain rules pertaining to them. For example, no one
should enter the gurdwara premises with one's shoes on or with head
uncovered. Other rules in the rahit maryada concern the conduct of
religious service and reverence due to the Guru Granth Sahib. Rules also
prohibit discrimination in the sangat on the basis of religion, caste, sex or
social position, and the observation of idolatrous and superstitious
practices.

98. Unlike the places of worship in some other religious systems,
gurdwara buildings do not have to conform to any set architectural
design. The only established requirement is the installation of the Guru
Granth Sahib, under a canopy or ina canopied seat, usually on a platform
higher than the floor on which the devotees sit, and a tall Sikh pennant
atop the building. Lately, more and more gurdwaras have been having
buildings imitating more or less the Harimandar pattern, a mixture of
Indo-Persian architecture. Most of them have square hails, stand on a
higher plinth, have entrances on all four sides, and have square or
octagonal domed sanctums usually in the middle. During recent decades,
to meet the requirements of larger gatheririgs, bigger and. better
ventilated assembly halls with the sanctum at one end have become
accepted styie. The location of the sanctum, more often than not, is such
as to allow space for circumambulation. Sometimes, to augment the
space, verandahs are built to skirt the hall. Popular model for the dome is
the ribbed lotus topped by an ornamental pinnacle. Arched copings,
kiosks and solid domelets are used for exterior decorations. For functions
other than purely religious, a gurdwara complex must provide, in the
Same or adjacent compound, for Guru ka Langar and accommodation for
pilgrims.

Gurmantar

99. Gurmantar, is that esoteric formula or term significant of the
“Supreme Being or the deity which the master or teacher confides to the
neophyte to meditate on when initiating him into his spiritual discipline,
The concept of mantra goes back to the pre-Vedic non-Aryan tradition
and to the primitive cults of magic, animism and totemism. It has since
been a continuing element one way or another in the religious traditions
of the world and traces of it pervade to this day among the most modern
of them. The occultist and the tantrist believe that mantras have power
over the deity and can make it confer the desired boon or favour.

74

According to the Brahmanical tradition, the universe is under the power of
the gods, the gods are under the power of the mantras and the mantras
are under the power of the Brahmans. The mantras have power over the
gods or forces of Nature, but the Absolute Reality or the Supreme Being is
here excluded. The mantras of the occultist comprised words which, in
most cases, were merely weird sounds or perversions of meaningful
words. The repetition, ceaseless repetition in the prescribed manner, of
these was believed to prove efficacious in producing the desired resutt.
Mantras also began to be culled from scriptural texts, and were used for
the purpose of propitiating the gods. Similarly, certain mystic words from
Scriptures were chosen to be meditated upon to win release or liberation.
Om is the highest mantra in the Hindu system.

100. With the initiation ceremonies of different creeds developed the
concept of the gurmantra. In Hinduism, Brahmans were the teachers.
Their gurmantras, mantras imparted by gurus or teachers, were neither
uncommon nor secret. The usual forms were Hari, Har, Rama, Hare
Krsna, etc. Sohang (That I am) and Ahang (I am That) are the mystic
gurmantras of the Vedantists. What makes a gurmantra meaningful is
that it is whispered into the ear of the disciple by the guru. The disciple
repeats the gurmantra as he is told to do to realize the Supreme.
Whereas the mantras of the tantrists aim at gaining worldly advantages,
the gurmanitra is meant to lead one to the ultimate objective of liberation.

101. In Sikhism, the gurmantra is neither variable nor confidential. It is
not whispered into the ear of the disciple, but openly pronounced. The
word Vahiguru has been the gurmantra for the Sikhs from the very
beginning; Vahiguru is the name by which the Supreme Being is known in
the Sikh tradition. Bha Gurdas (1551-1636) makes the statement
"Vahiguru is the gurmantra; by repeating it thou hast thy ego erased,"
(Varan X111.2), In the Guru Granth Sahib, the gurmantra to be practised
is referred to as nam, i.e. the Divine Name. Absorption in nam, i.e.
constant remembrance of Ged's Name is repeatedly recommended. "All
gains—spiritual and material—flow from concentration on nam" (GG,
290). "Gather the riches of God's Name; thus wilt thou earn honour in the
hereafter," (GG, 1311). "Grant me the merit (O God) of remaining
attached to thy Name." This nam, according to Sikh tradition, Guru Nanak
received in a mystical experience, during his disappearance into the Bein
rivulet which is described in the Puratan Janam Sakhi in terms of a direct
communion with the Divine Lord. "As the Lord willed, Nanak the devotee
was escorted to His Presence. Then a cup filled with amrit (nectar) was
given him with the command, 'Nanak, this is the cup of Name-adoration.

75

Drink it... Go, rejoice in My Name and teach others todo so... I have
bestowed upon thee the gift of My Name. . ." It is believed that the Name
Guru Nanak revealed was Vahiguru.

102. The Mul Mantra or root formula with which Sikh Scripture opens
defines the Reality. The epithet sat; (satya from Sanskrit as) in it means
ever-existent, eternal. Onkar, the primal word in the Mul Mantra, is for
the ternporal world that wonder whose name is sat. Vahiguru directly and

103. Sikhism by definition is the faith of discipleship. The Guru is central
to the system—the Ten who lived in person and the Guru Granth Sahib
which was so apotheosized in 1708 by the last of the Gurus, Guru Gobind
Singh. The Guru's word is for the Sikh the Word Divine, and he is meant
to live by it. He to whom the Guru imparts nam mantra, i.e. gurmantra,
alone achieves perfection (GG, 1298): he receives bliss transcending all
desires, (GG, 318); he has his fear and suffering annuiled (GG, 51); he
has himself accepted everywhere (GG, 257): and he has his sins
cancelled pierced by the arrow of truth (GG, 521). Gurmantra acts as
Panacea for all ills (GG, 1002). Accursed is he who is devoid of gurmantra
(GG, 1356-57). Gurmantra fixes one's mind on Him Who pervades

to initiate the neophytes. While inaugurating the Khalsa in 1699, Guru
Gobind Singh substituted khande di pahul or amrit for charan pahul. At
that ceremony, the neophytes quaffed five palmsful of sweetened water

shouted Vahiguru Ji ka Khalsa, Vahiguru Ji ki Fateh, every time he took a
draught of the elixir. He thus imbibed the gurmantra Vahiguru. Initiating
in this manner the first five Sikhs known as pan] piare, the Five Beloved,

76

Guru Gobind Singh had himself initiated by them with the same rites.
Since then any five Sikhs reputed for their religious devotion can initiate
the neophytes and administer to them the gurmantra. Constant repetition
of Vahiguru with full concentration, withdrawing one's mind from the
world of the senses, is practising the Sikh spiritual discipline of nam so
reverberatingly inculcated by the Gurus in the Holy Book.

Gurmat

105. GURMAT means counsel or tenets of the Guru, more specifically
the religious principles laid down by the Guru) is a term which may in its
essential sense be taken to be synonymous with Sikhism itself, It covers
doctrinal, prescriptive and directional aspects of Sikh faith and praxis.
Besides the basic theological structure, doctrine and tenets derived from
the teachings of Guru Nanak and his nine successors, it refers to the
whele Sikh way of life both in its individual and social expressions evoived
over the centuries. Guidance received by Sikhs in their day-to-day affairs
from institutions established by the Gurus and by the community nurtured
upon their teachings will also fall within. the frame of gurmat. In any
exigency, the decision to be taken by the followers must conform to
gurmat in its ideological and/or conventional assumptions.

106. The ‘guru’ in gur-mat means the Ten Gurus of the Sikh faith as well
as gur-bani, i.e. their inspired utterances recorded in the Guru Granth
Sahib. The instruction (mat) of the Guru implies the teaching imparted
through this holy word, and the example set by the Ten Gurus in person.
Direction derived from these sources is a Sikh's ultimate norm in shaping
the course of his life, both in its sacred and secular aspects, The spiritual
path he is called upon to pursue should be oriented towards obtaining
release, i.e. freedom from the dread bondage of repeated births and
deaths, and standards of religious and personal conduct he must conform
to in order to relate to his community and to society as a whole are all
collectively subsumed in the concept of gurmat.

107. Theologically, gurmat encompasses a strictly monotheistic belief,
Faith in the Transcendent Being as the Supreme, indivisible reality
without attributes is the first principle, The attributive-immanent nature of
the Supreme Being is also accepted in Sikhism which posits power to
create as one of the cardinal attributes of the Absolute or God of its
conception. The Creator brought into being the universe by his hukam or
Will, without any intermediaries. Man, as the pinnacle of creation, is born
with a divine spark; his liberation lies in the recognition of his own
spiritual essence and immanence of the Divine in the cosmic order.

77

Fulfilment comes with the curbing of one's haumai or €90 and cultivation
of the discipline of nam, i.e, absorption in God's name, and of the
humanitarian values of Seva, selfless Service to fellow men, love and
tolerance,

recitation by the individual of gurbani, thus Participation in corporate
service, or silent contemplation on the holy Word in one’s Solitude. Kirat
karni, vand chhakna te nam Japna is the formula which succinctly sums
Up what is required of a Sikh: he must work to earn his living, share with

109. On the ethical plane, gurmat prescribes a code of duties and moral
virtues, coupled with the distinctive appearance made obligatory for the
Khalsa. A Sikh becomes a full Member of the Khalsa brotherhood after he
has received the rites of initiation and the vows that 9° with it. Violation
of any part of the code (particularly the four Prohibitions) of the Kalsa is
treated as disregard of gurmat and renders the offender guilty of
apostasy. The tribunal of Sri Akal Takht at Amritsar has traditionally been
regarded as Supreme in religious, social and secular affairs of the Sikhs

110. Directional injunctions under gurmat can be issued to individuals or
communities by Panj Piare, the five elect ones, They will provide solution
to problems that arise or problems brought before them. Or, one

‘consults’ the Guru by presenting oneself before the Guru Granth Sahib to
obtain in moments of perplexity his (the Guru's) guidance which comes in
the form of the sabda, i.e. hymn or stanza, that first meets the eye at the
top. of left-hand page as the Holy Book is opened at random. There are
instances also of the community leaders deciding on a course of action
through recourse to such consultation. The institution of gurmata (sacred
resolution), unanimous decision taken or consensus arrived at in the
presence of Guru Granth Sahib, dates back to the early eighteenth
century.

1ii. Some of the conventions and customs established to resolve
lingering controversies have become part of gurmat. In regard to the
wedding ceremony for instance, the custom of anand karaj has gained
universal acceptance which was not the case until the beginning of the
twentieth century: any other form of the ritual will not have the sanction
of gurmat today. As regards meat-eating, gurmat has not given a final
verdict, both vegetarianism and non-vegetarianism being concurrently
prevalent. The use of intoxicants is, however, clearly prohibited.
Casteism and untouchability are ruled out in principle; any vestiges of it
such as use of caste-names as surnames are,generally considered against
gurmat. The 48-hour- long uninterrupted recitation of the Guru Granth
Sahib,.called akhand path, has over the decades come to be accepted as
part of the Sikh way of life.

112. Gurmat does not approve of renunciation. It insists, on the other
hand, on active participation in life. Human existence, according to Sikh
belief, affords one a rare opportunity for self-transcendence through
cognizing and contemplating on the Name and through deeds of selfless
service. One rehearses the qualities of humility, compassion and fraternal
love best while living in the world. A householder who works to earn his
living and is yet willing to share with others the fruit of his exertion and
who cherishes ever God in his heart is, according to gurmat, the ideal
man, Even as reverence for the pious and the saintly is regarded
desirable, parasitism is forbidden in gurmat. The.cultivation of the values
of character and of finer tastes in life is commended.

113. The writings of the Gurus preserved in the Guru Granth Sahib and
the Dasam Granth best interpret and elucidate what gurmat is. Some
anecdotes recorded in the Janam Sakhis also help explain gurmat
principles. A systematic exposition of gurmat principles was for the first
time undertaken by Bhai Gurdas (d. 1636), who in his Varan expatiated
upon terms such as gurmukh, one attuned to the Gurus' teaching, sangat,

—

79

feliowship of the holy, and S€va, humble acts of service in the Cause of
the community and of fellow men in general, besides evolving a

Gurmata
114, GURMATA means counse! OF resolution adopted by the Sikhs at an
assembly of theirs held in the name of the Gury concerning any religious

Sanction of the Guru, the assembly having acted by the authority of the
Guru Granth Sahib,

oS SSS:

SS cea

80

the will of the Khalsa expressed in council in his own presence. In the
battle of Chamkaur, following the evacuation of Anandpur, most of the
Sikhs in train as well as two of the Guru's sons fell fighting against the
pursuing host. The few surviving Sikhs suggested to the Guru to leave the
fortress, to which he was not agreeable. They then expressed their joint
will in the name of the Khalsa calling upon the Guru to escape. This was a
gurmata in its nascent form. The Guru had no option but to ‘obey’.

118. Gurmata had emerged as a well-established democratic institution
towards the middle of the eighteenth century. European travellers such as
George Forster (A Journey from Bengal to England) and John Malcolm
(Sketch of the Sikhs), both of whom visited the Punjab, the former in
1783 and the latter in 1805, have left vivid accounts of the functioning of
the gurmata. According to these accounts, Sikhs gathered twice a year,
on the occasions of Bafsakhi and Divai, at Akal Takht to take stock of the
political situation, to devise ways and means to meet the common
danger, to choose men to lead them in battle, and so on. The procedure
was democratic. All those who attended these assemblies of the Sarbatt
Khalsa, the entire Sikh people, had an equal say in the deliberations. "All
private animosities ceased" and everyone present "sacrificed his persona!
feeling at the shrine of general good." Everyone was actuated by
"principles of pure patriotism” and considered nothing but "the interest of
the religion and the commonwealth" to which he belonged. After the
gurmata was passed, everyone, irrespective of whether he had spoken for
or against it when it was debated considered it his religious duty to abide
by it. The assembly met in the presence of Guru Granth Sahib and the
Dasam Granth. Inaugural ardasa (supplication) was said by one of those
present seeking the Guru's blessing, sacramental karahprasad was
distributed and proposals were put forth for discussion. Ardasa, continues
John Malcolm, was again recited and all those present vowed, with the
Guru Granth Sahib betwixt them, to lay aside all internal disputes and
discords. "This moment of religious fervour and ardent patriotism" was
utilized to reconcile all animosities. Proposals were then considered and
an agreed gurmata evolved, the whole assembly raising shouts of sat sri
akal together in token of acceptance.

119. To cite some of the historic gurmatas, Sikhs resolved by mutual
counsel at a general assembly at Amritsar in 1726 to avenge the slaying
of Tara Singh of Van and his companions and rise to obstruct the
functioning of the government. They attacked treasuries and arsenals and
chastised the officials who had been spying on them. When in 1733 an
offer of a jagir and title of Nawab was received from the Mughal governor

Permitting them to Carry out raids on Mughal Strongholds, The assembly
held on the Baisakhi day (30 March) of 1747 resolved by a gurmata
Passed to erect at Amritsar a fort which came to be known as Ram Rauni.

on the reverse, "Struck at Lahore, the Seat of government, in the
auspicious samvat 1822 (AD 1765).

gurmata, "alt tne Sikhs," records Ratan Singh Bhangu, Prachin Panth !
Prakash, "assembled in a divan, Sitting in one place, they adopted a

81

of Lahore, Sikhs by one voice chose Kapur Singh for the honour. Though
there was no formal gurmata adopted, the consensus was arrived atina
divan in keeping with the same spirit and procedure. A Sikh conclave took
place at Amritsar on Divalf (14 October) of 1745 to take stock of the

~ situation following the death of the governor of Lahore, Zakariya Khan, .

who had launched large-scale Persecution, and adopted a gurmata
extending sanction to the 25 Sikh groups which had emerged and
permitting them to carry out raids on Mughal! strongholds, The assembly

held on the Baisakhi day (30 March) of 1747 resolved by a gurmata ©

passed to erect at Amritsar a fort-which came to be known as Ram Rauni,

120. By a gurmata passed in 1748 (Baisakhi, 29 March), Sikhs decided to
establish the Dal Khalsa, choosing Jassa Singh Ahluvalia as the leader and
reducing the number of recognized jathas to 11 (the number having gone
up to 65 by then) and providing for a record being kept at the Akal Takht
of the possessions of each group in a separate file (mis/). A gurmata in
1753 formally endorsed the system of Rakhi introduced by the ruling Sikh
clans. In 1765, a gurmata was passed proclaiming the supremacy of the
Sarbatt Khalsa over individual leaders. Through another gurmata the
Same year, a coin was struck with the inscription, Deg 0 tegh a fateh o
nusrat be dirang, yaft az Nanak Guru Gobind’ Singh (prosperity, power
and unfailing victory received from Nanak and Guru Gobind Singh), and
on the reverse, "Struck at Lahore, the seat. of government, in the
auspicious samvat 1822 (AD 1765),

121. To challenge Ahmad Shah Durrani returning from Sirhind to Lahore
at the time of his seventh invasion of India (1764-65), the Sikhs made a
gurmata. "Ali the Sikhs," records Ratan Singh Bhangu, Prachin Panth
Prakash, "assembled in a divan. Sitting in one place, they adopted a
gurmata that they must now confront the Shah and match arms with him.
Every second day, they say, he comes and harasses us. Without fighting
him now, we shall obtain no peace. He who survives will be spared this
daily suffering; he who dies attains realms divine."

122. Conquests up to 1767 were made by the misis in the name of the |

Khalsa, but, with personal ambition and aggrandizement gaining the
Upper hand over the years, the sense of a corporate Sikh commonwealth
gradually wore away. In the days of Sikh rule, the institution of gurmata
fell into desuetude, The last semblance of a gurmata was an assembly of
Sikh sardars called by Maharaja Ranjit Singh in 1805 to discuss the
situation arising from the entry into Sikh dominions of the fugitive
Maratha chief, Jasvant Rao Holkar, followed by British troops under Lord

82

Lake. The word gurmata was resurrected after the lapse of Sikh
sovereignty, especially with the rise of the Singh Sabha movement in the
closing decades of the nineteenth century. Gurmata then referred to any
decision on a matter of religious or social import arrived at by common.
consent at a Sikh assembly in the presence of the Guru Granth Sahib,
The Akali movement brought within its orbit political issues as well. The
word gurmata is now in everyday use for a resolution adopted at a Sikh
religious divan or political conference.

Gurmat Sangit (Sikh singing or Shabad Kirtan)

123. GURMAT SANGIT or Sabad kirtan has been an integral part of Sikh
worship from the very beginning. Hymn-singing was in fact the earliest
form of devotion for the Sikhs. Even in the time of Guru Nanak, the
disciples assembled together to the shabads, i.e. hymns composed by the
Guru and thus to render praise to the Lord. Kirtan has since been
appropriated into the regular gurdwara service. But Sikh kirtan eschews
all expression of abandon or frenzy in the form of clapping and dancing.
Laudation is proffered to the Supreme Being who is without form,
nirankar or nirakar, and not toa deity in any embodiment or incarnation.

124. The texts of the shabad kirtan are those that comprise the Holy
Book of Sikhs known as the Guru Granth Sahib, or Adi Granth, compiled
by Guru Arjan in 1604. Probably no other religion shows a closer
relationship between music and its scriptures than does Sikhism. The Holy
Book is organized according to ragas, 31 in number, to which the poetic
hymns belong. The total number of hymns is 5,694 with 4,857 (the
author's figures) contributed by six of the ten Gurus and 837 by Hindu
bhaktas, Sikh devotees and Sufi saints. Under each raga the hymns of
the Gurus are recorded first and are arranged in the order of chaupadas
and dupadas (hymns of 4 and 2 verses, respectively), astapadis (hymns
of 8 verses), longer poems organized around a motif, and chhants—
hymns of four or six verses, lyrical in character, vars on the pattern of
ballads consisting of pauris, each pauri preceded by two or more slokas,
and hymns by bhaktas and other devotees similarly arranged.

1425, The Gurus were highly knowledgeable of music and well-versed in
the classical style. Guru Nanak kept with him as constant companion a
Muslim musician, Mardana, who played the rabab or rebeck. Guru Nanak
wished his hymns to be sung to ragas that express the spirit of the text
and ‘performance style to be compatible with the meaning of the hymn.
The succeeding Gurus followed his example. The ragas named in the Holy
Book were selected probably because of their suitability for expressing the

ith the main raga but sufficiently different
to set off the textual material musically, thus keeping the many verses
from becoming musically monotonous. For example, the Gauri group
offers many Possibilities. A main raga from another section of the Holy
Book may also be used as a variant. Talas are left to the discretion of the

performer and are usually those of the classical system although regional

putras, is to clarify and retain the individual character of each raga,
Historically this has been the concern of music theorists rather than

Spiritual experience. About kirtan (music directed to the expression of
devotion) it has been said: kirtany nirmolak hira anand guni gahira—
kirtan is an invaluable jewel, bringing bliss, treasure of noble qualities
(GG, 893). Guru Arjan says about the beauty and harmony of music to
induce the Mood of devotion: dhanu su rag surangare alapat sabh tikh

jai—which are blessed as the beautiful: musical measures when performed .
all desire then ends (GG, 958).

128. Guru Nanak, warning the mind against voluptuous indulgence in
music such as had been current in India particularly among the upper
classes, says:-

“git raga ghan tal si kure,

trihu-guna upjai binasai dure;

duji durmati dardu na jai,

chhutai gurmakhi daru guna ga”

‘False are such songs, musical measures

and reverberating accompaniments

As arouse the Three Qualities and,

destroying devotion, draw the self away from God.
By duality and evil thinking is suffering not removed:
Liberation by the Master's guidance comes.

Chanting Divine laudations is the true remedy for life’s ills’
(GG, 832).

129. The musical directions given in the text of the Guru Granth Sahib
are detailed so as to guide the composer and performer to adhere to the
proper classical tradition in music. On page 838, at the opening of the
composition bearing the title Thitin (the dates) in the measure Bilaval, the
musical direction is ghar 10, jati. This refers to the particular score in
which the music is composed as also to the rhythm on the tabla or drum.

130. Guru Amar Das, whose attachment to music and its modes is deep
and ecstatic, has set down his impressions of some of the musical
measures in which he has composed his bani. On Siri Raga:-

‘raga vichi sri ragu hai je sachi dhare piaru;

sada hari sachu mani vasai nihchai mati aparu. ‘
85

‘Gauri ragi sulakhanj Je khasmaj chiti karei;:
bhanai chalaj Satiguru, kaj 4isa sigary karei. , ,
The Raga Gauri is reckoned noble,

should she in the Lord fix the seif:

Induce obedience to the Divine Will

133. Bilaval, in Bilaval ki Var (GG, 849-55). is Mentioned to express
constancy of devotion, twice by Gury Amar Das and twice by Guru Ram
Das. Bilaval is the raga expressive Of joy. True joy, however, comes not

from melody but from the holy Name of God. Says Guru Amar Das:-

Leave aside Music, melody and words; serve the Lord;
thereby may ye be honoured at the Divine Portal.

banished, (GG, 849)

On the Same page occurs another sloka:

bilavaly karihu tum Piariho ekasy Siu liv lae, | .

134.

86

Ye loved ones, in devotion to the Sole Supreme Being, find
you joy;

Thus will your suffering of transmigration be annulled, and in
Truth shall ye be absorbed.

Ever shall ye live in joy (bilava/) and bliss, should you obey
the holy Preceptor's will...’ (GG, 849)

Guru Ram Das, earlier on the same page, at the opening of this Var,

thus expresses the joy of Bilaval, the word itself implying ° "joy".

135.

“hari utamu hari prabhu gavia kari nadu bilavalu ragu;
upadesu guru suni mannia dhuri mastaki pura bhagu. . ra

‘The Lord exalted, Supreme Master have I lauded in the tune
of Bilaval;

The Master's teaching have I followed, by Supreme good luck
ordained in Primal Time.

Day and night have I ever uttered the Lord's praise with
devotion for Him in my heart lodged.

My mind and body, in bloom, are like a garden fresh.
By the lamp of Enlightenment by the Master lit,
The gloom of ignorance. is lifted.

Nanak, servant of God, finds life from beholding the Lord's
face, even though it be for a short hour.’ (GG, 849)

Thus Guru Amar Das on Ramkali:-
“ramkali ramu mani vasia ta bania sigaru. . a

‘In chanting Ramkali as the Lord in the self is lodged, that is
the truest self-decoration;

As through the Master's land is abloom the lotus of the
heart,

On the seeker is bestowed the treasure of devotion.
With illusion gone is the self awakened,

And gloom of ignorance lifted.

ee,

—_

137,

87

She alone has true beauty that with the Lord is in love;

A woman of good repute,
the beloved.

Egoists know not of the true make-up,

Their life is all lost,

One that has the make-up of other than devotion,

In transmigration remains caught.’(GG, 950)

obtained,

And on the tongue should run the Lor
(GG, 642)

d's holy Name.’

Guru Ram Das in the same Var (the same Page):-

" sorathi tami suhavani ja hari namu dhandhole, , ."

‘Sorathi is Pleasing should she go out in quest of the Lord’s

The Master, exalted being, should she Propitiate,

And by wisdom

granted by the Master, the Name Divine
utter:

And dyed in God, her vest

In the dye of God Should she dip.’ (GG, 642)

everlasting bliss has she with

138, Guru Amar Das thus expresses himself on the measure Kedara:-

W

“kedara raga vichi janiai bhai sabde kare piaru. .
‘Brother! Consider Kedara exalted among the ragas,
Should one chanting it be in love with the holy Word,
Should join holy company, and to the holy Lord be devoted;
Casting off one's own impurity, may save one's whole clan;

Should garner the wealth of noble attributes, and cast off evil
qualities.

Saith Nanak: Truly united is he who turns not away from the
Master,

And forms not devotion to another.(GG, 1087)

139. Maru raga, whose name comes from marusthal (dry land), is thus
celebrated by Guru Amar Das:-

“maru te sitalu kare manurahu kanchanu hoi. . .”
‘The burning hot desert He turns to coolness;

Rusted iron he turns into gold;

Praised be the Holy Lord, Supreme over all.’ (GG, 994)

140. Malar, the raga associated with the rainy season and joys of
romantic love, is thus transmuted into a spiritual experience by Guru
Amar Das.

"

“malaru sital ragu hai hari dhiaiai santi hoi.. .
‘Malar's music is cooling;
true peace comes from meditation on the Lord.’ (GG, 1283)

141. Below is given a detailed statement of the functions and
atmosphere ascribed traditionally to the various ragas, along with the
banis composed to each, within the corpus of the Guru Granth Sahib. In
this statement the bhaktas and other devotees using them are not
mentioned, only the Gurus-are included.

(a) SIRI (Shri). Raga Sri was favoured by the Hindus for religious
occasions and is found in many of the old treatises. In the Ragmala
mocd is one of Majesty combined with prayerful meditation. This
raga ts always referred to as "Siri Raga" rather than placing the
term raga before the name. It accompanies about 142 sabdas.

(i)  Aroh: Sa Re M'a, Pa Ni Sa.

(li) Avroh: Sa Ni Dha, Pa M'a Ga Re Sa.

(iii) Pakar: Sa, Re Re Pa, Pa M'a Ga Re, Re Re, Sa.
(iv) Vadi: Re,

(v) Samvadi: Pa.

(6) MAIH. This raga is attributed to Guru Nanak, who
developed it from a Punjabi folk tune. It does not appear in the
Ragmala nor does it seem to be a classical raga today, Possibly it

(i) Aroh: Sa Re Ma Pa Dha Sa.

(ii) Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Pa Ma Ga Re Sa,
(ili) Vadi: Ma.

(iv) Samvadi: Sa.

(c) GAURI. = Gauri iS one of several Gauri ragas and appears in
the Ragmala as a ragini of Siri Raga. This is an evening raga
assigned to autumn and its mood js contemplative, The
composition in Gauri is very voluminous. Gauri was used by Guru
Nanak, Guru Amar Das, Guru Ram Das, Guru Arjan and Guru Tegh
Bahadur, Several forms of Gauri exist historically and this probably
accounts for the large number of variants: Gauri Cheti, Gauri

Bairagan, Gauri Dipaki,

90

Gauri Purbi-Dipaki, Gauri Guareri, Gauri-

Majh, Gauri Malava, Gauri Mala, Gauri Sorath, Gauri Dakhani.

(i) Aroh: Sa Re Ga Re Ma Pa Ni Sa.

Gi) Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Ma Pa, Dha Pa Ma Ga, Ga Re Sa Ni

Sa.
(iii) Vadis Re.

(iv) Samvadi: Pa.

a vibrate as in Siri Raga

Occasionally Re is performed with
prominence through either

which has the same vadis. Ni is given
stopping or lingering on this note.

(d) ASA. Asaisa very old raga, once popular in the Punjab but
ts today. In the Ragmala this is a ragini of

seldom heard in concer
raga Megha. However, today it is assigned to the Bilaval thata. Asa

is a devotional raga for the cold season and is performed in the
early morning just before sunrise. However, it ig also known as 4
twilight melody with a calm mystical mood. Asa-was used by Guru
‘Nanak, Guru Angad, Guru Amar Das, Guru Ram Das, Guru Arjan

and Guru Tegh Bahadur.
(i) Aroh: Sa Re Ma Pa Dha Sa.

(ii) Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Pa Ma Ga Re Sa.
(iii) Vadi: Ma. ,
(iv) Samvadi: Sa.

vakra) raga in that approaches to certain

Asa is a crooked (
on. Its variants as given in

notes have to be made from a set posit
the Holy Book are Kafi and Asavari,
features in common with Asa. This raga may have originated in

Maharashtra about the time of the
pleasing sound made it suitable for bhajans by the Hindu devotees.

(e)  GUJARI. The name "Gujari

of Gujarat. This raga wa
of Gwalior (1486-1517) who lived at a time ©
achievement and referred to thi
Gujari is rarely used as 4 concert raga today and
about its form. In modern times it has been supplante

both of which have many

major Muslim invasions. Its

i" probably refers to the state
s in existence at the time of Raja Man Singh
f high musical

s raga in his writings about music.
little is known

d by Guijari-

i Ela aaa ena ciao cet Laat .
a TS tat nepal aN ae ee 2
Spit ae Dll
91

Todi. In the Ragmala, Gujari is listed as a ragini of Raga Dipak.
Today Gufjari-Todi belongs to the Todi thata. Gujari-Todi may be

Ram Das, and Guru Arjan.
(ij) Aroh: Sa Re Ga M'a Dha Ni Sa.
(ii) = Avroh: Sa Ni Dha M'a Ga Re, Ga Re Sa,

(iii) Pakar: Sa Dha, Ma, Dha Ni Sa, Ni Dha M'a Ga, Re, Ga
Re Sa.

(iv) Savar: Re Ga Dha Miva.
(Vv) Vadi: Dha.

(vi) Samvadi: Re,

(f) DEVAGANDHARI. Today Devagandhari is a rare, little
known, ancient raga. Its performance time is the morning hours.
Historically it has had three forms; the less ornamented type is
described here. In the Ragmala, Devagandhari is a ragini of
Malkaunsa, Today it belongs to the Asavari thata. Its mood is-one of
prayerful supplication presenting a heroic effact. The texts set to

and six by Guru Ram Das,
(i) Aroh: Sa Re Ma Pa Dha Sa.

(ii) = Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Pa, Ma Pa, Dha Ni Dha Pa, Ma Ga Re

ane

Sa,

(iii) =Pakar: Dha Ni Dha Pa, Ma Ga, Sa Re Ma, Ga Sa Re Ga
Sa,

(iv) Vadi: Ma,

(v)  Samvadi: Sa.
(g) BIHAGARA. _ Bihagara is very similar to the modern and
very popular raga Bihag. The resemblance is so close that many
performers have trouble maintaining the significance of each.
Bihagara is not given in the Ragmala. Today it is classified under
the Bilaval thata. Guru Ram Das, Guru Arjan and Guru Tegh
Bahadur set a total of 17 sabdas, chhants and a var to this raga.
The performance time is between 9 p.m. and midnight, and the
mood is devotional and tranquil. The texts composed to this raga
describe the complete peace and response that come to man when
he surrenders ail to the Lord.

(i) Aroh: Ni Sa Ga Ma Pa Ni Sa.
(ii) Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Pa Ni Dha Pa Dha Ga Ma Ga Re Sa.

(iii) Vadi: Ma.
(iv) Samvadi: Sa.

{h) VADAHANS. Little has been written about this rare raga.
It is not in the Ragmala, and today it is ascribed to the Kafi thata.
Fifty-three sabdas plus numerous siokas represent the total number
composed to this raga by Guru Nanak, Guru Amar Das, Guru Ram
Das and Guru Arjan. Vadahans is considered suitable for the cold
season and is assigned to the afternoon hours. Its mood is quiet
and tender. Texts set to the raga explain how the Guru alone can
lead one to the Lord. Without the Lord one is likened to a woman

without the love of her spouse.
(i) Aroh: Sa Re Ma Pa, Dha Ni Pa, Ni Sa.
(ii) Avroh: Sa Ni Pa, Dha Ma Ga Re, Sa Ni Sa.
(iii) Vadi: Re.
(iv) Samvadi: Pa.

(Gj) SORATHI. Raga sorathi appears in the Ragmala as 4
ragini of Raga Megha; today it belongs to the Khamaj thata.
Besides Guru Nanak, Sorathi was used by Guru Nanak, Guru Amar .
Das, Guru Ram Das, Guru Arjan and Guru Tegh Bahadur for a total
of 150 hymns plus numerous slokas. Sorathi belongs to the cold
season and is performed in the first quarter of night. The mood is -
light and cheerful, with a pleasing sound resembling Raga Desh.
93

The texts composed to this raga show how the words of the Guru
"can enlighten the mind. All fears vanish and one is filled with bliss.

(i) | Aroh: Sa Re Ma Pa Ni Sa.

(ii) Avroh: Sa Re Ni Dha, Ma Pa Dha Ma Ga Re Ni Sa.

(iif) Vadi: Re,
(iv) Samvadi: Dha.,

The melodies are characterized by sweeping phrases with
glides connecting all leaps, even the shorter ones. Movement is
moderately fast.

(k) DHANASRI. Raga Dhanasri appears in the Ragmala as a
ragini of Malkaunsa and currently is a member of the Kafi thata. Tt
closely resembles Bhimpalasi in musical content but the vadis and
moods are different. Dhanasri is performed in the early afternoon
and presents a cheerful, happy mood, It provided the setting for
hymns by Guru Nanak, Guru Amar Das, Guru Ram Das, Guru Arjan
and Guru Tegh Bahadur for a total of 101 hymns. These texts stress
that man reaps what he sows. Only in the Lord may be found the
riches that dispel fear and ignorance and thus cause man to realize
his true self.

(i) ~~ Aroh: Sa Ga Ma Pa Ni Sa.

(ii) Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Pa Ma Pa Ga Re Sa.
(iii) Vadi: Pa.

(iv) Samvadi: Sa.

Pa is given considerable emphasis and Ni and Pa receive
Sliding approaches, a characteristic of this raga. The pentatonic
ascent provides some of the melodic features of this raga.

(I) JAITSRI, Jaitsri does not appear in the Ragmala nor is it
found in the modern literature on the subject. Bhatkhande gives
Jait-Kalyan but this is not to be confused with the above. However,
Jaitsri does appear in a 17th century classification, but not in later
ones, Guru Ram Das, Guru Arjan and Guru Tegh Bahadur composed
30 hymns, a var and several slokas to this raga. Today Raga Jait is
found under the Marva thata and is assigned to the evening hours,
A mood of gentle quietness and mystery pervades this raga. The

94

texts describe the meditative thoughts of a devotee who has
surrendered himself to his Guru and Lord. Raga Jait has two forms
and the second includes some elements from Siri Raga and perhaps

this is nearest the original Jaitsri.
(i) Aron: Sa Ga Ma Pa Ni Sa.
ci) Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Pa Ma Ga Re Sa.
(iii) Pakar: Sa, Ga Pa M'a Dha Pa M'a Ga, M'a Ga Re Sa.
(iv) Vadi: Ga.
(v) Samvadi: Ni.

Because of the two different ways of singing this raga,
melodic patterns are not fixed.

(m} TODI. A ragini of Dipak in the Ragmala, Todi Is today the
head of a thata. It is considered one of the most important of the
north Indian ragas. Todi was used by the Gurus for 32 hymns. This
is a raga for the late morning hours and the mood is gentie, with an
aura of adoration. The texts corhposed to this raga emphasize that
no matter what problems man meets or what worldly affairs distract
the mind, devotion to the Lord brings one back to the path of

release from worldliness.
(i) Aroh: Sa Re Ga M'a Pa Dha Ni Sa.
(ii) Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Pa M'a Ga Re Sa.

(iii) Pakar: Dha Ni Sa, Re Ga, Re Sa, M'a Ga Pa M'a Ga, Re
Ga Re Sa.

Civ) Vadi: Dha.
(v) Samvadi: Re.

(n) BAIRARI. This raga appears in the Ragmala as the first
ragini of Siri Raga. In the Mesakarna Ragmala (1509), which is
almost the same as that of the Guru Granth Sahib, the first ragini of
Siri Raga is given as Vairati. However, modern sources do not give
Bairari nor Vairat but Barari and Varari as well as Varati are listed.
Kaufmann believes that all of these names refer to the same raga,
Barari. Whether this is the same as the old Bairari is open to
question. The possibility always exists that Bairari was a regional
tune. It was used by Guru Ram Das for six short hymns and by
Guru Arjan for one. The performance time for Bairari is during the

evening hours and it is currently assigned to the Marva thata. It
resembles Purva Kaiyan, the main difference being the use of Pa
which is strong in Bairari and weak in Purva-Kalyan. Popley places
Bairari in the same group as Siri Raga and this would agree with the
Ragmala.

(i) | Aroh: Ni Re Ga Pa, M'a Ga, M'a Dha Sa.

(ii) Avroh: Sa Ni Dha P'a, M'a Ga, Pa Ga, Re Sa.
(iii) Vadi: Ga.

(iv) ‘Samvadi: Dha,

(0) TILANG. Favoured by Muslims, this raga occurs in the
Ragmala as a ragini of Hindol. Today, it belongs to the Khamaj
thata. Tilang was used by Guru Nanak (6 hymns), Guru Ram Das
(3), Guru Arjan (5), Guru Tegh Bahadur (3), Kabir (1) and Namdev
(2) for a total of 20 hymns. Tilang is performed at night and has a
calm and pleasing mood, In the texts composed for this raga, the
question is asked why man should cling to all the evils of this life
when Guru Nanak has shown the way to true happiness and
fulfilment.

(i)  Aroh: Sa Ga Ma Pa Ni Sa.
(ii) Avroh: Sa Ni Pa Ma Ga Sa.
(iii) Vadi: Ga.

(iv) Samvadi: Ni.

(p) SUHTI. Suhi is classified in the Ragmala as a ragini of
Megha. It was a favourite with Muslims and was considered proper
for the hot season. Today this raga‘belongs to the Kah thata and
its performance time is late morning. In the Holy Book one variant
is given, Raga Suhi Lalit. Suhi was used by Guru Nanak, Guru
Angad, Guru Amar Das, Guru Ram Das and Guru Arjan for 130
hymns, a var plus many s/okas.

(i) | Aroh: Sa Re Ga Ma Pa, Ni Dha Ni Sa.
(ii) Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Pa, Ma Ga, Re Ga Re, Sa.
(ii} Vadi: Pa.

(iv) Samvadi: Sa.

— a,

96

(q) BILAVAL (ancient name Velavali). Bilaval had become
the basic scale for North Indian music by the early part of the 19th
century. Its tonal relationships ‘are comparable to: the Western
C- major scale. Bilaval appears in the Ragmala as a ragini of
Bhairava, but today it is the head of the Bilaval thata. The Ragmala
gives Bilaval as a putra (son) of Bhairav, but no relation between
these two ragas is made today. Bilaval is a morning raga to be sung
with a feeling of deep devotion and repose, often performed during
the hot months. Over 170 hymns were composed to this raga by
Guru Nanak, Guru Amar Das, Guru Ram Das, Guru Arjan and Guru
Tegh Bahadur.

(i) Aroh: Sa Re Ga, Ma Pa, Dha, Ni Sa.
(ii) Avroh: Sa Ni Dha, Pa, Ma Ga, Re Sa.
. (iii) Pakar: Ga Re, Ga Ma Dha Pa, Ma Ga, Ma Re Sa.

(iv) Vadi: Dha.

(v) Samvadi: Ga.

(r) GOND. The Ragmala records Gaund and Gund as putras
(sons) of Siri Raga, but does not give Gond. The possibility exists
that Gond is a regional raga derived from that group of ragas with
co similar names and characterized by phrases from other ragas ¢.g.
oy Bilaval, Kanara and Malar. Such names as Gaunda, Gand, Gounda,
; Gaundi, Goundgiri, and Gunda appear in classifications from the
oo 4ith to the 17th centuries. For those still known today (Gaudi,
Goundgiri, and Goud) performance rules are obscure. Performance
oh time Is late afternoon or early evening and the mood is
| |: contemplative and dignified. Gond was used by Guru Ram Das and
Guru Arjan (29 hymns). The texts beseech man to depend solely on
the Lord for all benefits since it is He who has given him all his
blessings.

(i)  Aroh: Sa Re Ga Ma, Pa Dha Ni Dha Ni Sa.
(ii) = Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Ni Dha Pa, Ma Ga, Re Sa.

(iii) Pakar: Re Ga Ma, Pa Ma, Ma Pa Ni Dha Ni Dha Ni Sa, Ni
Dha Ni Pa, Dha Ma.

(iv) Vadi: Sa.

(v) Samvadi: Ma.
97

(s) RAMKALI.  Ramkali is not given in the Ragmala but is one
of the most important ragas of the Guru Granth Sahib. All Gurus,
including Guru Tegh Bahadur, have composed verses to this raga.
The total number of sabdas comes to over three hundred. Ramkali
is a morning raga performed after sunrise usually during the hot
season. The mood is such as to inspire lofty thoughts. In the Guru
Granth Sahib, a number of hymns in Ramkali expound True Yoga
and other spiritual issues. Some celebrated compositions such as
Sidha Gosti, Anandu, Sadd, Oankar and the Var by Satta and
Baivand are composed to this raga, Some of the verses also contain
analogies to music and musical instruments. Four forms of this raga
are recognized, although only two are in general use today. The
raga belongs to the Bhairav thata.

(i) Aroh: Sa Ga Ma Pa Dha Ni Sa.

(ii) Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Pa, M'a Pa Dha Ni Dha Pa, Ga Ma Re
Sa.

(iii) Pakar: Dha Pa, Ma Pa, Dha Ni Dha Pa, Ga, Ma Re Sa.
(iv) Vadi: Pa.
(v) Samvadi: Re.

(t) NAT NARAIN. In the Ragmala, Nat is given as Putra (son)
of Megha while today Nat Narain appears under the Bilaval thata
and is assigned to the evening hours. This raga was used by Guru
Ram Das and Guru Arjan, Nat Narain is pictured as a warrior riding
to battle. In the Holy Book, the fight against sin is never-ending but
those who seek refuge in the Lord have their suffering removed.

(i) Aroh: Sa Ga Ma Re, Ma Pa Dha Ni Sa.

(ii) Avroh: Sa Dha Pa M'a Dha Pa, Ga Ma Re Sa,

(iii) Pakar: Sa Ma Ga Ma Pa, Dha Pa, Ma, Ga Ma Re Sa.
(iv) Vadi: Sa. |

(v) Samvadi: Re.

98

(u) MALI GAURA. Gaura is listed in the Ragmala as a putra
(son) of Dipak, but not Mali Gaura. Currently classified under the
Marva thata. Mali Gaura is performed in the evening at sunset. In
recent years it is rarely heard in concert. Guru Ram Das and Guru
Arjan composed to this raga 14 hymns included in the Holy Book.

(i) Aroh; Sa Re Sa Ni Dha Sa Re Ga Ma Pa, Dha Ni Dha Sa.
(ii) Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Pa, M'a Ni Dha M'a Ga, Re Sa.

(iii) Vadi: Re.

(iv) Samvadi: Pa.

(v) MARU. Maru is an old raga seldom heard in concerts
today. Some theorists equate it with Maruva or Marva. In the
Ragmala, Maru is a putra (son) of Malkaunsa. It is found in other
classifications from the 14th to the early I9th century. Maru was
used by Guru Nanak, Guru Amar Das, Guru Ram Das, Guru Arjan
and Guru Tegh Bahadur for 144 hymns, two vars plus 4 large
number of siokas. One of its variations is Maru Kafi. Maru is
assigned to the hours of sunset and is considered suitable for the
cold season. The mood is quiet and contemplative. The tonal
material given here is for Maru Bihag, Bilaval thata.

(i) Aroh: Sa Ga Ma Pa, Dha Ni Sa.
(ii) Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Pa, M'a Pa Dha Ni Dha Pa Ma Ga Re

Sa.

(iif) Pakar: Pa Dha Ni Dha Pa Ma Pa Ma Ga, Pa Dha Pa Ga
Re, Ga Re Sa.

(iv) Vadi: Pa.

(v) Samvadi: Ni.

(w) TUKHARI.  Tukhari was probably based on a folk tune and
was very likely developed by Guru Nanak into a raga for the singing
of certain sabdas. No raga of this name appears in the
classifications of the period when sabdas were being composed and
the Holy Book compiled. A raga called Mukhari may be found in the
classifications of Karnataka (South Indian) ragas during the period
from the 15th to the I8th centuries. Tukhari was used by Guru
Nanak, Guru Ram Das and Guru Arjan. Guru Nanak’s composition
Bara Maha is set to this Raga. It appears to be a raga for the

_ morning hours to be sung in winter. Its name Tukhari is the popular:
form of tushar (Sanskrit. for winter frost). No melodic material for
the Tukhari is available but, for the sake of comparison, the scale of
Mukhari is given: ;

(i) | Aroh: Ni Sa, Ga Ma Pa, Ni Sa.

(li) Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Pa, Ni Dha Pa, M'a Ga Re Sa.
(iii) Pakar: Ni Ni Dha Pa, Ma Pa, Ma Ga, Re Sa.

(iv) Vadi: Pa,

(v) Samvadi Sa.

(x) KEDARA. Kedara is an old raga dating from Guru Nanak's
time or even earlier which has become a very important and
popular North Indian raga today. It is supposed to possess magical
qualities, if correctly performed, which can heal the sick. In the
Ragmala, Kedara is a putra (son) of Megha but currently is in the
Kalyan thata. Kedara was used by Guru Ram Das and Guru Arjan
for a few short hymns. Several forms of Kedara have been and still
are in use. Thus considerable freedom of choice may be exercised
by the performer as to how this raga be performed in association
with a given text. In the most commonly used form, Kedara is
performed during the first quarter of the night and is particularly
auspicious when the moon is visible, a planet with which it has long
been associated, The mood is one of contemplation associated with
a sort of ascetic idealism. The sadness expressed in Ragmala
paintings suggests the longing of man for the Supreme Being when
this raga accompanies a sabda. The Kedara scale is vakra (crooked)
with unusual intervals:-

(i) | Aroh: Sa Ma, Ma Pa, Dha Pa, Ni Dha Sa

(ii) Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Pa, M'a Pa Dha Pa Ma, Ma Re Sa
(iii) Vadi: Ma

(iv) Samvadi: Sa

(y) BHATRON,  Bhairon was an important raga at the time of
Guru Nanak and has continued to retain its significance and
Popularity. Bhairon (not to be confused with Bhairavi) appears in
the Ragmala as husband of Bhairavi and four other raginis. Today it
is the head raga for one of the ten thatas. The Raga Sagara, a

treatise of circa 8th century, describes this raga as awe-inspiring
and as expressing the "fulfilment of the desire of worship."
Mesakarna (1509) calls this morning melody of the autumn season
one of awesome grandeur. Performed before sunrise, this raga was
used by Guru Nanak, Guru Amar Das, Guru Ram Das, and Guru
Arjan for 99 hymns,

(i)  Aroh: Sa Re, Ga Ma Pa Dha, Ni Sa.

(ii) Avroh: Sa Ni, Dha Dha Pa, Ma Ga, Re Re Sa.
(iif) = Vadi: Dha. |

(iv) Samvadi: Re.

The vadis are performed with a slow, wide vibrato which may
begin with the vadi itself or the highest limit to which it will extend.
In descent the vibrato must begin with upper limit. Otherwise
Bhairon has few characteristic phrases.

(z) BASANT. The name Basant is from Sanskrit vasant meaning
spring, and during that season of the year Basant may be
performed at any time of the day or night. Otherwise, it is reserved
for the night between 9 p.m. and midnight. The Ragmala gives
Basant as a putra (son) of Hindol, also a spring raga. Today it
belongs to the Purvi thata, The only variant noted in the Holy Book
is Basant-Hindo!l. Basant is a very old raga dating from the 8th
century. Guru Nanak, Guru Amar Das, Guru Ram Das, Guru Arjan
and Guru Tegh Bahadur composed sabdas to this raga. Performed
in slow tempo, this gentle melody depicts quiet joy. The descending
scale is usually found at the beginning of a composition with the
ascending form following later.

{i}  Aroh: Sa Ga Ma Dha Ni Sa.

{ii} Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Pa Ma, Ga Re Sa,
(iii) Vad: Sa.

(iv) Samvadi: Ma.

(aa) SARANG.  Sarang is reputed to have acquired its name
from the famous i4th century music theorist, Sarangadeva. The
Sarang raga consists of a group of seven, each of which is combined
with some other raga. Today when Sarang is given as the raga, it
usually means Brindavani-Saranga, a member of the Kafi thata.
we ©

ey

101

Performed during the midday period, its mood is quiet and peaceful,
In the Ragmala, Sarang is listed as a Putra (son) of Siri Raga.
Sarang is an important raga in the Guru Granth Sahib and was used
extensively by Guru Arjan. However, Guru Nanak, Guru Amar Das,
Guru Ram Das and Guru Tegh Bahadur also composed sabdas to
this raga and Guru Angad used it for some slokas.

(i) | Arch: Sa Re Ma Pa Ni Sa.

(ii) Avroh: Sa Ni Pa Ma Re, Sa.

(lif) Pakar: Ni Sa Re, Ma Re, Pa Ma Re, Ni Sa.
(iv) Vadi: Re,

(v) Samvadi: Pa,

(ab) MALAR (MALLAR or MALHAR). Malar is one of the

rainy-season ragas performed from June to September, During the
monsoons, Malar can be sung at any time of the day or night;
otherwise, It is designated for late evening or early morning. Its
mood is joyful because the rains cause the crops to grow and the
flowers to bloom. Malar is frequently combined with other ragas,
particularly Megha. Tansen added some changes to Malhar and this
raga is known as Mian ki Malhar, In the Ragmala, Gaund-Malar is
described as a ragini of Megha and is the only one with a Malhar
name, Today the Malhar ragas are assigned to the Kafi thata. A
favourite of Hindu musicians, Malhar was used by Guru Nanak, Guru
Angad, Guru Amar Das, Guru Ram Das, and Guru Arjan. The pure
Malhar is seldom performed today, and it might be heard in one of
its combinations.

(i) Aroh: Sa, Re Ga Ma, Ma Re Pa, Ni Dha Ni Sa.

(ii) Avroh: Sa, Dha Ni Pa, Ma Ga Ma, Re Sa,

(iii) Pakar: Sa Re Ga Ma, Ma Re Pa, Dha Ni Pa, Ma Re Sa,
(iv) Vadi: Ma.

(v) Samvadi Sa.

(ac) KANARA (Kanada). The modem name for this raga

_ appears to be "Kanada", probably a matter of transliteration from

its original name. Under the Kanara spelling this raga was prevalent
in the classifications of 16th and 17th centuries. However, in one

102

This would indicate that at one time these were two distinctly
different ragas. Kanara was used by Guru Ram Das and Guru Arjan
for 69 hymns, a var plus numerous slokas. In the Ragmala, Kanara
is a putra of Dipak. The modern Kanada is one of a group of many
Kanada ragas which are combinations of Kanada with other rages,
one of the most popular is Darbari-Kanada classified under the
Asavari thata. Assigned to the night hours, its mood is quiet and full
of majesty. Darbari-Kanada is performed in slow tempo and is a
popular concert form today. The details of this raga:

(i) Aroh: Sa Re Ga, Ma Pa, Ni Sa.

(ii) 9 Avroh: Sa, Ni Pa, Ma Pa, Ga Ma Re Sa.
(ili) Vadi: Pa.

(iv) Samvadi: Sa.

(ad) KALIAN. The Indian Sanskrit name for this raga is Kalyan
and the Persian is Yuman. In the Ragmala, Kalian is the son of
Dipak while today it is the head of the Kalian thata. It is performed
during the first part of the night and is considered a blessing
bringing all good into one's life. Guru Ram Das and Guru Arjan
composed 23 hymns to this raga. The texts exalt the far-reaching
and ajl-pervading power of the Lord. In the Holy Book the only raga
variant given is Bhopali (Bhupali).

(i) Aroh: Ni Re Ga, M'a Pa, Dha, Ni Sa.

(ii) = Avroh; Sa Ni Dha, Pa, M'a Ga, Re Sa.

(iii) Pakar: Ni Re Ga, Re Sa, Pa M'a Ga, Re Sa. .
(iv) Vadi; Ga.

(v) Samvadi: Ni.

(ae) PRABHATI. Prabhati does not appear in the Ragmala;
the nearest to it in name is Prabal. Prabhati belongs to the Bhairav
thata and is often combined with Raga Bhairav. Prabhati was the
setting used for some 58 hymns by Guru Nanak, Guru Amar Das,
Guru Ram Das and Guru Arjan. This is a morning raga to be
performed in a slow and dignified manner.

(i)  Aroh: Sa Re Ga Pa Dha Sa.
(ii} Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Ni Pa Ga Re Sa.

(iii) Pakar: Pa Pa Sa, Ni Dha Ni Pa, Pa Dha Ga Pa, Dha Pa
Dha.

(iv) Wadi: Sa.
(v) Samvadi: Pa.

103

(af) JATJAVANTI. | Jaijavanti was used only by Guru Tegh
Bahadur for four hymns. This raga does not appear in.the. Ragmala
but was known as Javanta as early as the 14th century. Today it is
regarded as an important raga belonging to the Khamaj thata. This
majestic and highly arresting raga is assigned to the night hours.

(i) | Aroh: Sa, Re Ga Ma Pa, Ni Sa.

(ii) Avroh: Sa Ni Dha Pa, Dha Ma, Re Ga Re Sa,
(iii) Pakar: Re Ga Re Sa, Ni Dha Pa Re.

(iv) Vadi: Re,

(v} Samvadi: Pa.

142. Besides the sabdas, there are 22 vars or ballads in the Holy Book of
the Sikhs which form a class by themselves. Var, a genre mainly of
Punjabi origin, comprises a number of stanzas called pauris, sung by
performing groups of three or four dhadis each to the accompaniment of
dhaddhs, small two-faced drums held in one hand and played by the
fingers of the other, and a sarangi. Vars in the ‘Guru Granth Sahib also
have two or more s/okas preceding each pauri. The slokas are recited solo
by the dhadis (or ragis) in turn while pauris are sung in unison.by the
group in traditional tunes of various folk ballads. To some of the vars
Guru Arjan, who compiled the Holy Book, added directions with regard to
the tunes in which they were to be sung.

143. Compositions of the bhaktas and other devotees inciuded in the
Guru Granth Sahib are also placed under appropriate ragas and are to be
sung accordingly. Besides the contents of the Guru Granth Sahib,
compositions of Guru Gobind Singh whose writings form a separate Book,
the Dasam Granth, Bhai Gurdas (d. 1636) and Bhai Nand Lal Goya are
approved canon for recitation as part of gurdwara service. In his
voluminous corpus, Guru Gobind Singh employs a vast variety of prosodic
forms and metres, but hymns usually sung by ragis are his kabitis,
Svaiyyas and sabdas. The work of Bhai Gurdas comprises vars and kabitts
and savaiyyas, the first-named in chaste Punjabi and the two latter in
sadhukari, a form of Hindi mixed with regional diction. Bhai Nand Lal
wrote primarily in Persian using ghazal as his principal poetic form.

143. Dating from the time of the Gurus, the preservation of the correct
performance style has always been a major concern. Mardana is reputed
to have been the first to create a school for such training. Guru Arjan is

ry

104

credited with establishing the gurmat sangit or the approved style of
hymn-singing for the training of ragis and rababis. He, himself, undertook
the teaching of the pupils and was particular about the accurate rendering
of the sabdas. Old musical structure and style have survived through
some traditional families. Some venerable centres have continued over
the generations the programme of instruction for gurdwara musicians,
among them the one at Daudhar. A few other places that have
contributed to the preservation of the style are the Pracharak Vidyala at
Tarn Taran, near Amritsar, the Sis Ganj Gurdwara in Delhi and the Shahid
Sikh Missionary College, Amritsar.

143. Sikh music has some limitations placed upon it in order that the
religious requirements of the performance may be retained. Emphasis is
placed on the mefodic line so as to enhance the meaning of the text. The
purpose of the musical settings of the words of the Gurus is to impress
these upon the consciousness of the listeners through emotional as well
as intellectual appeal. The Gurus aimed at conveying experience through
the "feelings" to make the maximum impact. Therefore, important words
of the text should fall on important notes of the raga. Poetic pauses
should also be observed. The message must reach the listener through
clearly enunciated words. Hymns should be sung with affirmation in a full
voice and this gives Sikh music its distinctive character. Tempos may be
only slow and medium, not fast. Sargam (singing with Sa-Re-Ga) and
fast tans (rhythmic-melodic figurations) are not permitted because they
attract attention to themselves. Gamaks or ornaments are limited to
those essential to the correct performance of a raga, such as glides
between notes, to maintain a connected melodic line. Words must be
pronounced clearly and accurately with no adjustments for musical
effects. Ragas to be used may include oniy those specified or authorized,
so that the emotional content may not be varied by the ragis. The music
must be free of secular characteristics which may be in vogue at any
given time. However, the purpose is not to inhibit the creative faculties of
the performers lest the vitality of the music be sacrificed. Hand gestures
and clapping, so much a part of classical performance, are not in keeping
with the required mood of tranquillity. Hence these are totally prohibited.
No appreciation may be shown to the musicians except in the dignified
ways ordained by the Sikh religion. Congregational singing is encouraged
on certain occasions. For this the ragi sings a phrase or fine and the
congregation repeats. Or, sometimes, the congregation. divides itself in
two parts, each of them alternately singing lines in unison.

~ ee

105

Gurmukhi Script

144. GURMUKHI is the name of the script used in writing primarily
Punjabi and, secondarily, Sindhi language. The word gurmukhi seems to
have gained currency from the use of these letters to record the sayings
coming from the mukh (lit. mouth or lips) of the (Sikh) Gurus. The
letters no doubt existed before the time of Guru Angad (even of Guru
Nanak) as they had their Origin in the Brahmi, but the origin of the script
is attributed to Guru Angad. He not only modified and rearranged certain
letters but also shaped them into a script. He gave new shape and new

- order to the alphabet and made it precise and accurate. He fixed one

letter for each of the Punjabi phonemes; use of vowel-symbols was made
obligatory, the letters meant for conjuncts were not adopted and only

which were in the fast {ine of the existing alphabets were shifted to the
first line. Again, at was given the first place in the new alphabet,

us here whether the script was foreign or local,.but it has now been
established, on the basis Of internal evidence, that whatever be its name,
the Aryans did have a system of writing which must have been borrowed
freely from local Scripts, The Iranians ruled in the Punjab in the 3rd and
4th centuries BC, They brought with them Aramaic script, which helped in
the growth of Kharosthi largely used in the Punjab, Gandhar and Sindh
between 300 BC and 3rd century AD. But even then Brahmi, which in its
development in the Punjab had undergone several changes, was
commonly used along with Kharosthi. There are coins of the Bactrian
kings and inscriptions of the Kushan rulers having both scripts on thern.
Brahmi was, of course, more Popular on account of its simple curves
alternated with Straight strokes. Hence, in due course, it replaced

106

146, Immediately later, it developed, especially in northern India, fine
curves and embellished flourishes with a small headline over each letter,
and became rather ornamental. This stage of Indian script was called
Kutil, meaning curved. From Kutil evolved the’ Siddhamatrika which had
the widest use in northern India. Some scholars think that these two
scripts existed simultaneously, From the sixth century to the ninth,
Siddhamatrika had a very wide use from Kashmir to Varanasi. With the
rise of regional languages taking the place of Sanskrit and Prakrit,
regional scripts grew in number. Ardhanagari (west), Sharda (Kashmir)
and Nagari (beyond Delhi) came into use, and tater both Sharda and
Devanagari, an offshoot of Nagari, started their inroads into the land of
the five rivers. This is evident from the coins of the Ghaznavids and
Ghoris minted at Lahore and Delhi. tt is also known that the common
(non-Brahman and non-official) people used a number of scripts for their
temporal and commercial requirements. Of these Lande and Takre
characters were most prevalent.

147. It. is on account of these currents that scholars have tried to
establish relationships of Gurmukhi with Devanagri (G.H. ojha),

aArdhanagari (G.B. Singh), Siddhamatrika (Pritam Singh), Sharda

(Diringer) and Brahmi (generally). Some ascribe it to Lande and some -
others to Takri, a branch of Sharda used-in Chamba and Kangra. The fact .
is that it is derived from or at least allied to all these and others |
mentioned above in their historical perspective.

148. Regionally -and contemporarily compared, Gurmukhi characters :
have direct similarities with Gujrati, Lande, Nagari, Sharda and Takri: |

they are either exactly the same or essentially alike.

149. Internally, A, h, G& \ f, x, n, | letters of Gurmukhi had undergone !
some minor orthographical changes before AD 1610. Further changes :
came in the forms of A, h and | in the first half of the nineteenth century .
The manuscripts belonging to the eighteenth century have slightly;
different forms of these letters. But the modern as well as old forms OU;
these letters are found in the orthography of the same writers i
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

150. Another reform carried out is the separation of lexical units of thes
sentence which previously formed one jumbled unit; lately punctuatio
marks borrowed from English have been incorporated besides the full sto
(1) which existed traditionally.
-wwue es uv ew yu © Uw & Yb 6 6

107

151. The Gurmukhi script is sémi-syllabic in the sense that ‘a’ is inciuded
in the consonant signs in some situations. This 'a' is net pronounced at
the end of the syllable. Thus, kf is kal, and rm is Ram, that is, k in ki (kal)
represents k+a, while | represents only I. Other vowels after consonants
are shown by vowel symbols which also happen to be the first three
letters of the Gurmukhi alphabet. of these, the first.and the third are not
used independently. They always have a diacritic attached to them. The
second letter is used without diacritics also, and in that case it is
equivalent to 'a' as in English ‘about'. With diacritics a total of ten vowels
are formed, viz., u, U, 0, a, a, ai, au, i, iande, OF these vocalic diacritics,
‘i’ occurs before a consonant (although Pronounced after it), u and y are
written below; a and j after a consonant; and e, ai, o and au over a
consonant. Similarly, the nasalization sign is also used over a consonant
though in fact it nasalizes the vowel. Of all the vowel-marks, called lagan
in Punjabi, a is the oldest, though initially just a dot was used for it. The
vowel-marks j and u are found in Asokan edicts and later inscriptions.

153. No change is effected in the form of the letter when a vowel-symbol
or diacritic is attached to it, the only exception being a to which an
additional curve is added which represents two syllables, This is the only
example of a single graphic form representing multiple sounds (and this
form has a theological background); otherwise there is no Gurmukhi letter

representing more than one phoneme, and there are no digraphs.

values. Thus k is called kakka, v is vava, Only x is tainka, The syllabary
ends with q rara. The total number of letters is 35 (3 vowels, 2 semi-
voweis, and 30 consonants). They are 52 in Devanagari, 41 each in
Sharda and Takri. A dot at the bottom of 4 number of consonants has
been used to represent borrowed sounds such as s, kh, gh, z, and f.

106

146, Immediately later, it developed, especially in northern India, fine
curves and embellished flourishes with a small headline over each fetter,
and became rather ornamental. This stage of Indian script was called
Kutil, meaning curved. From Kutil evolved the Siddhamatrika which had
the widest use in northern India. Some scholars think that these two
scripts existed simultaneously. From the sixth cehtury to the ninth,
Siddhamatrika had a very wide use from Kashmir to Varanasi. With the
rise of regional languages taking the place of Sanskrit and Prakrit,
regional scripts grew in number, Ardhanagari (west), Sharda (Kashmir)
and Nagari (beyond Delhi) came into use, and later both Sharda and
Devanagari, an offshoot of Nagari, started their. inroads into the land of
the five rivers. This is evident from the coins of the Ghaznavids and
Ghoris minted at Lahore and Delhi. It is also known that the common
(non-Brahman and non-official) people used a number of scripts for their
temporal and commercial requirements. Of these Lande and Takre
characters were most prevalent.

147. It is on account of these currents that scholars have tried to
establish relationships of Gurmukhi with Devanagri (G.H. ojha),
Ardhanagari (G.B. Singh), Siddhamatrika (Pritam Singh), Sharda
(Diringer) and Brahmi (generally). Some ascribe it to Lande and some
others to Takri, a branch of Sharda used.in Chamba and Kangra. The fact .
is that it is derived from or at least allied to all these and others ©
mentioned above in their historical perspective.

148. Regionally and contemporarily compared, Gurmukhi characters
have direct similarities with Gujrati, Lande, Nagari, Sharda and Takri: i
they are either exactly the same or essentially alike.

149, Internally, A, h, ¢ \, f, x, n, | letters of Gurmukhi had undergone :
some minor orthographical changes before AD 1610. Further changes t
came in the forms of A, h and | in the first half of the nineteenth century. :
The manuscripts belonging to the eighteenth century have slightly:
different forms of these letters. But the modern as well as old forms of:
these letters are found in the orthography of the same writers in
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

450. Another reform carried out is the separation of lexical units of the
sentence which previously formed one jumbled unit; lately punctuati
marks borrowed from English have been incorporated besides the full stop
(}} which existed traditionally.
107

151, The Gurmukhi script is semi-syllabic in the sense that 'a' is included
in the consonant signs in some Situations. This 'a' is not Pronounced at
the end of the syllable, Thus, kl is kal, and rm is Ram, that is, k in kI (kal)
represents k-+a, while | represents only {. Other vowels after consonants
are shown by vowel symbols which also happen to be the first three
letters of the Gurmukhi alphabet. Of these, the first.and the third are not
used independently. They always have a diacritic attached to them. The
second letter is used without diacritics also, and in that case it is
equivalent to 'a’ as in English ‘about'. With diacritics a total of ten vowels
are formed, viz., u, 4, O, a, a, ai, au, i, iande. Of these vocalic diacritics,
'i' occurs before a consonant (although Pronounced after it), u and u are
written below; a and i after a consonant; and e, ai, o and au over a
consonant. Similarly, the nasalization Sign is also used over a consonant
though in fact it nasalizes the vowel. Of ali the vowel-marks, called lagan
in Punjabi, a is the oldest, though initially just a dot was used for it. The
vowel-marks i and u are found in Asokan edicts and later inscriptions.

the placing of vowel-symbols under and over the letters, a characteristic
of all Indian scripts, creates some problems in printing and typing.

153. No change is effected in the form of the letter when a vowel-symbol
or diacritic is attached to it, the only exception being a to which an
additional curve is added which represents two syllables. This is the only
example of a single graphic form representing multipte sounds (and this
form has a theological background); otherwise there is no Gurmukhi letter
representing more than one phoneme, and there are no digraphs.

154, ‘a’, the first letter in the Gurmukhi arrangement, is non-traditional

ends with q rara. The total number of letters is 35 (3 vowels, 2 semi-
vowels, and 30 consonants). They are 52 in Devanagari, 41 each in
Sharda and Takri. A dot at the bottom of a number of consonants has
been used to represent borrowed sounds such as s, kh, gh, z, and f,

preceptor, and purb, parva in Sanskrit, meaning a festival or celebration,

108

These have been lately introduced though not as a part of the original
alphabet. Geminate (double or long) consonants are indicated by an
overhead crescent sign, termed as adhak and placed above the consonant
preceding the affected one. There is paucity of conjunct consonants in the
system. Only h, r, v_ are combined as second members of the clusters
and placed without the head line under the first members. r as the second
member of the conjuncts may also be depicted under the first member
just in the shape of a slanting comma. It is felt that conjunct consonants,
thanks to Sanskrit and English influence and expansion of the range of
the Punjabi language, are no jonger foreign to Punjabi pronunciation.
There is, therefore, great need to adopt, adapt or invent them. Attempts
have been made by some schoiars but their acceptance is still limited.

155. Gurmukhi has played a significant role in Sikh faith and tradition. It
was originally employed for the Sikh scriptures. The script spread widely
under Maharaja Ranjit Singh and after him under the Punjab Sikh chiefs,
for administrative purposes. It played a great part in consolidating and
standardizing the Punjabi language. For centuries it has been the main
medium of literacy in the Punjab and its adjoining areas where earliest
schools were attached to gurdwaras; Now itis used in all spheres of
culture, arts, education and administration. It is the state script of the
Punjab and as such its common and secular character has been firmly
established.

156, The alphabet has also crossed the frontiers of its homeland. Sikhs
have settled in all parts of the world and Gurmukhi has accompanied
them everywhere. It has a brighter future, indeed, in and outside the land
of its birth. Till recently, Persian script was largely used for Punjabi and
there was initially a considerable amount of writing in this script, but it is
becoming dated now. However, in the Pakistan Punjab Punjabi is still
studied, at postgraduate level, in Persian script.

Gurpurb
157. GURPURB a compound of two words, i.e. guru, the spiritual

signifies in the Sikh tradition the holy day commemorating one or another
of the anniversaries related to the lives of the Gurus. Observance of such
anniversaries is a conspicuous feature of the Sikh way of life. A_ line
frequently quoted from the Guru Granth Sahib in this context reads
"babania kahania put saput kareni—it only becomes worthy progeny to
remember the deeds of the elders" (GG, 951). Among the more important
gurpurbs on the Sikh calendar are the birth anniversaries of Guru Nanak

vee eye oo 6&6 & €

109

and Guru Gobind Singh, the martyrdom days of Gury Arjan and Guru
Tegh Bahadur, and of the installation of the Holy Book in the Harimandar
at Amritsar on Bhadon sudi 1, 1661 Bk/16 August 1604, Alongside these

which marks the birth, in 1699, of the Khalsa Panth, and the martyrdom
days of the young sons of Guru Gobind Singh. There are indications in the
old chronicles that the Succeeding Gurus themselves celebrated the
birthday of Guru Nanak. Such importance was attached to the
anniversaries that dates of the deaths of the first four Gurus were
recorded on a Jeaf in the first recension of the Scripture Prepared by the
Fifth Guru, Guru Arjan. The word gurpurb had come into use in the times
of the Gurus. It occurs in at least five Places, in Bhai Gurdas (1551-
1636), contemporary with Guru Arjan. To quote, "kurbani tina gursikha
bhae bhagati gurpurb karande—I am a Sacrifice unto Sikhs who with love
and devotion observe the gurpurb" (Varan, XIT,2),

158. What happens on gurpurbs is a mixture of the religious and the
festive, the devotional and the Spectacular, the Personal and the
communal. Over the years a standardized pattern has evolved, Yet no
Special sanctity attaches to the form, and variations can be and are
indeed made depending on the imaginativeness and initiative of local
groups. At these celebrations, the Sikh Scripture, the Gury Granth Sahib,
is read through, in private homes and in the gurdwaras, in a single
continuous ceremony lasting forty-eight hours. This reading, calied
akhand Path, must be without interruption; the relay of reciters who take
turns at Saying the Scripture ensures that no break occurs. Additionally
Special assemblies are held in gurdwaras and discourses given on the
lives and teachings of the Gurus. Sikhs march in processions through
towns and cities chanting the holy hymns. Special langars, or community
meals, are held for the participants who at certain places may be counted

besides the more literary and academic ones in schoois and colleges. On
gurpurbs commemorating birth anniversaries, there might be
iluminations in gurdwaras as well as in residential houses. Friends and
families exchange greetings. Coming into vogue are the printed cards
SUCH as those used in the West for Christmas and the New Year day.

110

159. Sikh fervour for gurpurb celebration had an unprecedented outlet at
the time of the tercentenary of Guru Gobind Singh’s birth in 1967. There
is no evidence on record whether centennials previously had been
similarly observed, References are however traceable to a proposal for
especially marking the second centennial in 1899 of the birth of the
Khalsa. The suggestion came from Max Arthur Macauliffe, author of the
monumental work, The Sikh Religion, but it did not receive much popular
support. The three-hundredth birth anniversary in 1967 of Guru Gobind
Singh turned out to be a major celebration evoking widespread
enthusiasm and initiating long-range academic and literary programmes,
It also set a new trend and format. With the same ardour have been
observed some other days as well; in 1969, the fifth centennial of Guru
Nanak’s birth; in 1973, the first centenary of the birth of the Singh
Sabha; in 1975, the third centenary of the martyrdom of Guru Tegh
Bahadur; in 1977, the fourth centenary of the founding by Guru Ram Das
of the city of Amritsar; in 1979, the 500" anniversary of the birth of Guru
Amar Das; in 1980, the 200" anniversary of the birth of Maharaja Ranjit
Singh; in 1982, the third birth centennial of Baba Dip Singh, the martyr.

Guru

160. GURU a spiritual guide or preceptor. The term, long used in the
Indian religious tradition, has a special connotation in the Sikh system.
The Sikh faith itself signifies discipleship, the word sikh (sisya in Sanskrit |
and sissa or sekha in Pali) meaning pupil or learner. The concept of Guru,
the teacher or enlightener, is thus central to Sikhism. The Guru, according |
to Sikh belief, is the vital link in man’s spiritual progress. He is the
teacher who shows the way. He is not an intercessor, but exemplar and
guide. He is no avatar or God's incarnation, but it is through him that. God
instructs men. He is the perfectly realized soul; at the same time, he is
capable of leading the believers to the highest state of spiritual
enlightenment. The Guru has been called the ladder, the rowboat by
means of which one reaches God. He is the revealer of God’s word.
Through him God’s word, sabda, enters human history. The Guru is the
voice of God, the Divine self-revelation. Man turns to the Guru for
instruction because of his wisdom and his moral piety. He indicates the
path to liberation. It is the Guru who brings the love and nature of God to
the believer. It is he who brings that grace of God by which haumai or
egoity is mastered. The Guru is witness to God’s love of His creation. He
is God’s hakam, i.e. Will, made concrete.

111

161. A special figure is employed to describe the transference of the
Guruship in the Sikh tradition. This figure helps us understand the true
nature of Guru. The Guruship passes from one Guru to the other as one
candle lights another. Thus the real Guru is God, for He is the source of
all light. It is clear that the Guru is not to be confused with the human
form (the unlit body). In the Sikh faith which originated in Guru Nanak’s
revelation, Ten Gurus held the office. In Sikhism the word Guru is used
only for the ten spiritual prophets—Guru Nanak to Guru Gobind Singh,
and for none other. Now this office of Guru is fulfilled by the Guru Granth
Sahib, the Sacred Book, which was so apotheosized by Guru Gobind
Singh.

162. Various connotations of guru have been given based on different
etymological interpretations. One generally accepted in Sikhism is that
derived from the syllable gu standing for darkness and ru for its removal.
Thus guru is he who banishes the darkness of ignorance. According to
Sikh belief, guidance of the guru is essential for one’s spiritual
enlightenment. ,

163. No particular text dealing with the concept of guru is found in the
Sikh Scripture, though scattered references abound. They are often
figurative and symbolic but are fully expressive of the pre-eminence
accorded to the guru. He has been called a tirtha, place of holy
pilgrimage, i.e. purifier; a khevat, the boatman who rows one across the
ocean of worldliness; a Sarovar, a lake where swans, i.e. holy saints,
dwell and pick up pearls of sacred wisdom for food; a samund, ocean
which is churned for the gems, for his bani, or inspired word, is itself deep
like the ocean and its wisdom can be brought out only after long
meditation; a dipak, lamp which lights up the three worlds. In another
comparison the Guru is called pilak, elephant controller, as he restrains
the mind that is like a mad, romping elephant. He is called data, donor of
wisdom; amritsar, the pool of ambrosia of the Name; a basith, one joining
the seeker in union with God; joti, the light which illuminates the world.
Other comparisons are anjan, collyrium, which sharpens the sight— a
metaphor for the spiritual vision; sahjai da khet, the field of equipoise or
equanimity; paharua, the watchman who drives away the five thieves, i.e.
the five evils. He js sura, the hero whose sword of jnana or knowledge
rends the veil of darkness and overcomes ignorance and wickedness,
Paras, philosopher’s stone which turns base metals into gold, for he
transforms ordinary men into holy saints. There are numerous more
Comparisons,

112

164. The first stanza of Bhavan Akhari, one of Guru Arjan’s compositions
in the Guru Granth Sahib, is a paean of glorification in honour of the Guru
(Gurudev) in exalted classical style. Gurudev, i.e. the divinely inspired
Master, is the mother, father; he is the Master and the Lord Supreme. He
is friend, relative, brother. He confers on the seeker the name of the
Supreme Being, i.e. the mantra, which is infallible. Gurudev is the
touchstone which surpasses all paras. Gurudev is sacred tirath of the
ambrosia of immortality, a bath wherein Is a bath in jnana. Gurudev is the
banisher of sins; he makes the impure pure. Gurudev has existed fram
beginning of the beginning, from the beginning of the ages and has lasted
through all the yugas; i.e. his light is eternal. His teachings of the Name
alone can save humanity (GG, 250).

165. The guidance of the guru is absolutely essential; no spiritual gain
can accrue without the guru’s guidance, The view has been constantly
reiterated in the Guru Granth Sahib:-

Were there to rise a hundred moons, and a thousand suns
besides,

Without the guru, it will still be pitch darkness (GG, 463).
None other than the guru can give enlightenment,
Nor can happiness without him enter the heart (GG, 650).

“None has ever realized God, none at all, without the guru’s
guidance,” declares Guru Nanak (GG, 466). Using figurative language, it
is pointed out that no blind man can find the path without the guru, as
nobody can reach the housetop without the stairs and no one can cross
the river without a boat. As says Guru Amar Das, he who remains without
the Guru’s guidance is the rejected one (GG, 435).

166. What is gained if the guru’s compassion and guidance are available
is thus elaborated:-

By the holy preceptor’s grace is faith perfected;

By the holy preceptor’s grace is grief cancelled,

By the holy preceptor’s grace is suffering annulled;
By the holy preceptor’s grace is love of God enjoyed;

By the holy preceptor’s grace is union with God attained (GG,
149).
oa a ed

oe ew ww wu we w

 & GP GD Gp

113

167. The guru cleanses the seeker’s mind of the impurity and brings it to
contemplating on the Name. He breaks the shackles of the disciple who
turns away from the excitements of the senses. He seeks his welfare and
cherishes him as the beloved of his heart. A touch of him erases all
blemishes of conduct. The bard Nail refers to the transforming power of
the guru thus in symbolic language: “From base metal I became gold by
hearing the words of the Guru. Poison was turned’into nectar as one
uttered the Name revealed by the Guru. From iron a diamond I became
by the Guru’s grace. From stone one becomes a diamond in light of the
jnana manifested by the Guru. The Guru transformed common timber into
fragrant sandalwood and banished all pain and misery. By worshipping
the feet of the Guru, the foolish and the evil became angels—the noblest
of men” (GG, 1399).God, who is “without form, colour or feature,” is yet
self-communicating. “Through the True Word (sada) is He revealed,” as
says Guru Nanak (GG, 597), Further:-

Within every heart is hid the Lord;

In all hearts and bodies is his light.
By the guru’s instruction

Are the adamantine doors opened.

Here sabda and guru are juxtaposed. Often they become one
word, sabdaguru, identifying sabda with the guru.

The sabda guru is the profound teacher:

Without the sabda the world remains in perplexity (GG, 635).

Set your mind on the gursabda

Which is over and above everything else (GG, 904).
Through the sabda one recognizes the adorable Lord
Through the word of the guru (gurvak)

Is he imbued with the truth (GG. 55).

168, Sabda is the same as the guru, says Guru Ram Das. “Bani (the
guru’s utterance or word) is the guru and the guru is bani; in bani are
contained all the elixirs” (GG, 982). Sabda, ever present, is articulated
through the human medium, the guru, so ordained by the Supreme

114

Being. The historical Gurus of the Sikh faith are believed to have uttered
the truth vouchsafed to them by God. “As I received the word from the
Lord, so do I deliver it,” says Guru Nanak (GG, 722). Guru Arjan: “I know
not what to say; I utter only the word I receive from God” (GG, 763), And
Guru Rim Das: “Own ye the Sikhs the bani of the guru as truth and truth
alone, for the Creator Himself makes him utter it” (GG, 308).

169. God,.thus, is the prima! Guru of the whole creation, This is how
Guru Nanak discloses the identity of his own Guru. One of his
compositions, the Sidha Gosti, is in the form of a discourse with a. group
of yogis. Therein a yogi puts the question to him, “Who is your Guru?
Whose disciple are you?” (GG, 942). To which Guru Nanak replies: -

’ Sabda is my Guru, and the meditating mind the disciple.
By dwelling on Him I remain detached.

Nanak, God, the cherisher of the world through the ages, is
my Guru (GG, 943).

Elsewhere Guru Nanak and his successors affirm that the
Satiguru is God.

The light of the pure Lord, the essence of everything, is all-
_ pervading.

He is the infinite, transcendent Lord, the Supreme God
Him Nanak has obtained as his Guru (GG. 599),
Accredited is the personality of the bright Guru, God
Who is brimful of all might.

Nanak, the Guru is the transcendent Lord Master.

He, the ever present, is the Guru (GG, 802).

170. According to Sikh belief there is no difference in spirit between such
a guru and God. “The guru is God and God is the Guru: there is no
distinction between the two” says Guru Ram Das (GG, 442). “God hath
placed Himself within the guru, which He explicitly explaineth” (GG, 466).
“Acknowledge the Transcendent God and the guru as one" (GG, 864).
The real personality of a human being is the atman, the physical body is
only a temporary dwelling place for the atman which is eternal and is a
spark from the Eternal Flame, the Supreme Atman or God. “O my self,

eo

oe

“wy

a

115

you are an embodiment of God‘s Light; know your true origin” (GG, 441),
Being encased in the physical frame, this atman becomes so involved in
the temptations of the physical world that it forgets its reality and loses
contact with the Flame-of its origin, whereas the atman of the Guru
remains ever in tune with that Supreme Light from which it has sparked
off. It is thus that God is accepted as residing within the guru. Itis in this
sense that there is no distinction seen between the guru and God. Guru
or satiguru is thus a word with a double meaning in the Guru Granth
Sahib. It may refer to God or to His chosen prophet.

171. The true Guru is easily distinguished. “The true guru is one who has
realized the Supreme Being and whose association saves the disciple”
(GG, 286). “The true guru is one in whose heart dwells the Name Divine”
(GG, 287). “He by meeting whom the mind is filled with bliss is the true
guru. He ends the duality of the mind and leads (the disciple) to the
ultimate state of realization” (GG, 168), “Praise, praise be to the true
guru who demolishes the fort of dubiety; wondrous, wondrous the true
guru who unites the seeker with the Lord” (GG 522). The guru is ordained
as such for the liberation of mankind. He transmits the message of God
to men and performs acts of grace to save ther. The guru is sent by God,
but he is not God's incarnation, “Singed be the tongue which says that
the Lord takes birth” (GG, 1136). He is ajuni (unborn); He is saibhan
(self-existent). Highest tribute and adoration are reserved for the guru.
Devotion to the guru is deemed to be the quintessential quality of a
religious man. The pain of separation from the guru and the joy of

meeting with him find expression in poetry of deep intensity, as in Guru
Arjan’s hymn in Rag Majh (GG, 96-97),

172. Guru Nanak was Suspicious of human preceptors, pandits, gurus
and pirs. They are generally denounced as blind guides, self-styled and
traders upon ignorance and superstition. He warns against them:-

Never fall at the feet of one

Who calls himself guru and Pir, and goes begging.
He who eats what he earns

And from his own hands gives some in charity,

He alone knows the true way of life (GG, 1245),

The disciple whose guru is blind will not attain the goal (GG,
_ $8). Taking up this thought the third Guru said:
116

The disciples whose guru is blind perform only blind deeds.
They follow their own wayward will,
And ever utter the grossest lies (GG, 951).

173. When Guru Nanak speaks of his guru or satiguru, it is not such
teachers that he has in mind. The true guru is the means of the self-
revelation of God. He makes the concealed and ineffable God known. He
symbolizes the supreme act of God’s grace in revealing Himself as Truth,
as the Name, as the Word. The true guru comes to unite all people of the
world and to unite them to the Supreme Being. A false guru creates
schisms, divisions and prejudices. The true guru as manifested in the
history of the Sikh faith comes to suppress the forces of evil and to rally
the forces of good. He comes to resuscitate the values of true religion,
dharma.

174. The Sikh faith developed under the guidance of ten successive
Gurus from 1469 to 1708. Guru Gobind Singh, the Tenth Guru, appointed
no personal successor, but bequeathed the guruship to the Holy Book, the
Guru Granth Sahib. The holy Word or sabda had always been referred by
the Gurus as well as by their disciples as of Divine origin. The Guru was
the revealer of the Word. The Word was identified with the Guru when
Guru Gobind Singh proclaimed the Holy Book Guru before he passed
away. Bards Balvand and Satta theorize that of their three aspects—joti,
i.e. light, jugati, way or procedure, and ka/a, i.e. body—it is only kaia, the
body, that changes as succession passed from one historical Guru of the
Sikh faith to the next. Jot/ and jugati remained the same. As sang the
bards: “Joti oha jugati sai sahi kaia pheri palatiai” (GG, 966). From their
verse emerges this concept of three aspects of the guruship.

175. God is the source of all light or consciousness. God kindles that
light, in the chosen human body, the Guru; in the jot/-aspect the Guru is
the most enlightened human being, he is in direct communion with God,
He communicates the message of God to mankind. He transmits His light
to the world. Without the guru, darkness prevails. Says Guru Nanak, “The
light of the guru alone dispels darkness” (GG, 463); “The guru is that
lamp which illuminates the three worlds” (GG, 137). Balvand and Satta in
their hymn in the Guru Granth Sahib affirm that the historical Gurus of
the Sikhs shared the same jot/ (light). The jotf got transferred to the
successor’s body. Thus, right from 1469, the year of the birth of Guru
Nanak, to 1708, the year of the passing away of Guru Gobind Singh, it
was one continuing jot/ manifesting itself in the Ten Gurus.

3
p)
>

the temporal, It was the ministry of deg (charity), and tegh (power), of
mir? (temporal authority) and Pirl (spiritual power). According to the bard,
Nanak founded sovereignty on the firm rock of truth, |, Nanaku fayu

(light) to Lahina who became Guru Angad, he unfurled the umbrella over
his head—/lahane dharionu chhaty Sirf, i.e. he invested Lahina with the
authority to carry on with the practice ne had introduced. The Gurus
preached devotion, bhakti or nam (meditation on the Divine Name),
recitation of bani, the sacred texts, and Kirtan, i.e, singing of the Lord’s
glory In sangat or holy assembly, Along with nam, they inculcated the
values of kKirat, labouring with one’s hands, and vand chhakna, sharing
with others the fruit of one’s exertions. The Gurus had carved @ clear way
for the disciples,

himself lived Up to the teachings he imparted to his disciples.

a eee

118

480. The sangat turned into Khalsa in the time of Guru Gobind Singh who
introduced khande di pahul, i.e. baptism of the double-edged steel sword.
With the formation of the Khalsa, the concept of the Guru Panth
formalized. By becoming the sixth person to receive amrit at the hands of
the Panj Piare, the Five Beloved, who formed the nucleus of the Khalsa
Panth, Guru Gobind Singh testified to his own membership of the Panth,
and to having merged himself with it and endowed it with the charisma of
his own personality. The bani, always revered by the Sikhs as well as by
the Gurus as Word Divine, was however above all. This was something
which even the Gurus themselves could not change. It was this
superiority which Guru Gobind Singh acknowledged in 1708 when he
invested Scripture as Guru. The idea of the Guru Panth lives on in the
Khalsa. But the Khalsa itself could not alter the fundamental tenets of the
Sikh faith as enunciated in the bani. The Guru Granth Sahib was, in the
presence of the Khalsa, proclaimed Guru. The finality of the
pronouncement remains a cherished truth for the Sikhs and the Holy Book
has since been the perpetual authority, spiritual as well as historical, for
them. No living person, however holy or revered, can now have for them
the title or status of Guru. For Sikhs the Guru is the teacher, the prophet
under direct commission from God—the Ten who have been and the Guru
Granth Sahib which is their continuing visible manifestation.

Importance of Community Kitchen or Guru Ka Langar

181, GURU KA LANGAR is a community kitchen run in the name of the
Guru. It is usually attached to a gurdwara. Langar, a Persian word, means
‘an almshouse’, ‘an asylum for the poor and the destitute', 'a public
kitchen kept by a great man for his followers and dependants, holy
persons and the needy.’ Some scholars trace the word langar to Sanskrit
anaigrh (cooking place). In Persian, the specific term /angar has been in
use in an identical sense. In addition to the word itself, the institution of
langar is also traceable in the Persian tradition. Langars were a common
feature of the Sufi centres in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Even
today some dargahs, or shrines commemorating Sufi saints, run /angars,
like Khwaja Mu’in ud-Din Chishti’s at Ajmer.

182. In Sikhism, the institution of /angar owes its origin to the founder,
Guru Nanak himself. Community kitchens came into existence with the
sangats or holy fellowships of disciples which sprang up at many places in
his time. Sikhs sat in pangat (lit., a row) without distinctions of caste or
status, to share a common meal prepared in the /angar. Besides the
kitchen where the food was cooked, /angar stood for the victuals as well

a
3
;

&)

uy or Mcp Sey

Soe

119

as for the hall where these were eaten. The disciples brought the offerings
and contributed the labour of their hands to prepare and serve the food.
Guru Nanak and his successors attached a great deal of importance to
langar and it became, in their hands, a potent means of social reform.
The former gave it the centraj place in the dharamsala he established at
Kartarpur at the end of his preaching tours. He worked on his farm to
provide for himself and for his family and to contribute his share to the
common fangar. He had such of his disciples as could afford to set up
dharamsalas and langars. Among them were Sajjan Thag, then lost to
godly ways, and a wealthy nobleman, Malik Bhago, both of whom had
converted to his message. Bhumia, formerly a dacoit, was asked by Guru
Nanak to turn his kitchen into a langar in the name of God. A condition
was laid upon Raja Shivnabh of Sangladip (Sri Lanka) that he open a

langar before he could see him (Guru Nanak), The Raja, it is said, happily
complied.

183. Guru Angad, Nanak II, further extended the scope of the institution.
He helped with cooking and serving in the /angar. His wife, Mata Khivi,
looked after the pilgrims and visitors with the utmost attention. Such was
her dedication to work in the langar that it came to be known after her

name as Mata Khivi ji ka Langar. The bard Balvand pays homage to her in
his verses, in the Guru Granth Sahib. To quote the stanza:-

Blest, sayeth Balvand, is Khivi [the Guru’s wife],
Comforting by far is her presence to the disciple,
Amply she distributes food in the Guru’s langar.
The fare includes khir, rice cooked in milk and ghee,
Which has the taste of ambrosia itself.

(GG, 967)

184. The Var by Satta and Balvand also applauds Guru Amar Das’s
langar wherein “ghee and flour abounded,” In spite of rich variety of food
served in his /angar, Guru Amar Das ate a simple meal earned by the
labour of his own hands. “What was received from the disciples was
consumed the same day and nothing was saved for the morrow,”
Contributing towards the Guru ka Langar became an established custom
for the Sikhs. Partaking of food in Guru ka Langar was made a condition
for disciples and visitors before they could see the Guru. Guru Amar Das’s
injunction was: “pahile pangat pachhe sangat’—first comes eating
120

together, then meeting together.” Langar thus gave practical expression
to the notion of equality. Emperor Akbar, who once visited Guru Amar
Das at Goindval, had to eat out of the common kitchen like any other
pilgrim, As the Mahima Prakash records, the Emperor refused to step on
the silks spread out for him by his servants when going to call on the
Guru, He turned aside the lining with his own hands and walked to the
Guru’s presence barefoot.

185. Bhai Jetha, who came into spiritual succession as Guru Ram Das,
served food in Guru Amar Das’s /angar, brought firewood from the forest
and drew water from the well. By such deeds of devoted service, he
gained enlightenment and became worthy of the confidence of Guru Amar
Das. Langar served to train the disciples in seva and to overcome class
distirictions.

186. The institution of /angar had become an integral part of the Sikh
movement by now and, with the increase in its numbers, it gained further
popularity and strength. With the development under Guru Ram Das and
Guru Arjan of Amritsar as the central seat of the Sikh faith, the capacity
of the local Guru ka Langar increased manifold. Sikhs came from far-off
places to see their Guru and to lend a-hand with the construction work.
They were all served food in Guru ka Langar.

187. Guru Hargobind and Guru Tegh Bahadur travelled extensively in
north and northeast India. This led to the establishment of many new
sangats. Each sangat meant an additional /angar. In the reign of Guru
Gobind Singh, the institution of /angar acquired further significance. At
Anandpur, the new seat of Sikhism, a number of /angars were in
existence, each under the supervision of a devoted and pious Sikh. Food
was avallable in these /angars day and night.

188. Once Guru Gobind Singh, disguised as an ordinary pilgrim, made a
surprise check of the /angars at Anandpur. He discovered that Bhai Nand
Lal’s fangar was the best maintained. He complimented him and asked
others to emulate his standards of dedication and service. One of Guru
Gobind Singh’s commandments was that a Sikh visiting another Sikh’s
door must be served food, without hesitation or delay. Another of his
sayings ran: “Gharib da munh guru ki golak hai —to feed a hungry mouth
is to feed the Guru.” This spirit of common sharing and of mutual co-
operation and service was the underlying principle of the Sikh tradition of

. fangar.

So

—

121

189. “Keep the /angar ever open” are reported to have been the fast
words of Guru Gobind Singh spoken to Bhai Santokh Singh before he
passed away at Nanded. One of the lines in his Dasam Granth reads:
“Deg tegh jag me dou chalai—may langar (charity) and sword (instrument
of securing justice) together prevail in the world.” The first Sikh coin
minted in the eighteenth century carried the Persian maxim: “Deg tegh
fateh—may fangar and sword be ever triumphant.”

191. Maharaja Ranjit Singh made grants of jagirs to gurdwaras for the
maintenance of langars. Similar endowments were created by other Sikh
rulers as well, Today, Practically every gurdwara has a /angar supported
by the community in general. In smatier gurdwaras cooked food received
from different households may comprise the fangar. In any case, no
pilgrim or visitor will miss food at meal time ‘in a gurdwara. Sharing a
common meal sitting in a Pangat is for a Sikh an act of piety. So is his

meéritorious.

192. The institution of Guru ka Langar has served the community in
many ways. It has ensured the Participation of women and children in a
task of service of mankind. Women play an important role in the
Preparation of meals and the children join in serving food to the Pangat,
Langar teaches the etiquette of sitting and eating ina community. Again,

langar has played a great part in upholding the virtue of equality of all
human beings. ;

193. Besides the fangars attached to gurdwaras, there are improvised
Open-air /angars at the time of festivals and gurpurbs, Specially arranged
fangars on such occasions are probably the most largely-attended
community meals anywhere in the world. There might be a hundred
thousand People partaking of food at single meal in one such langar.
Wherever Sikhs are, they have established their fangars. In their prayers,
122

the Sikhs seek from the Almighty the favour: “Loh langar tapde rahin—
may the hot plates, the langars, remain ever in service.”

Hukam

194, HUKAM -The Idea Of The Supreme Being (God) In Sikhism,
Sikhism a Theistic Creed. Sikhism is a Theistic religion, and totally rejects
all reasoning which may attempt to prove that the universe is an
automatic machine, or that it is a continuation of atoms which are self-
created and self-perpetuating. According to the Sikh belief God is self-
created and all that exists, has emanated from Him. As to any
speculations about the origin of God or the creation of the universe by
Him, no mythological or any other explanation is offered. Man's inteilect
cannot penetrate the Divine mystery, and hence all that man can attempt
is to feel or realize the existence of God through intuition or spiritual
experience, called anubhava in Indian philosophy. Logic or any other kind
of reasoning cannot prove the existence of God, for against one kind of
reasoning another can be advanced. Hence for man it is to try to realize
the existence of God in a spirit of humility, and to engage in prayer and
devotion, so that he may become one with the Supreme Reality, that is
God. Guru Nanak says in Japuji (Stanza 16):-

By One Word the whole vastness of the universe was
created.

Resulting in millions of streams of existence.
Again, in stanza 21 it is said:

The Yogi knows not the day and date of creation.
Nor any one the month and season.

The creator of the universe alone knows this secret.

195, God is believed in Sikhism to be eternal—that is, He is without
beginning and without end. All else that is visible, had a beginning and
will end. Even the sun and the moon, the stars, the earth—all will end.
The gods, Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva, indira—and all others are mortal. In
other words, they are subject to the control of Time which marks their
beginning, decline and end. God alone is Timeless (Akal). Akal is one of
the key-concepts in Sikh spiritual thought. While this term Is from the 5

Sanskrit in its origin, consisting of ‘a’ (negative prefix) and Kal (time), the :

a
«
|
A
oS
ag

8
FS)
3
3
>
)
?
)

123

Particular spiritual and Philosophical! signification which belongs to it in
Sikh thought is unprecedented in Indian phitosophy,

196. Sikhism is strictly monotheistic in its belief. This means that God is
believed to be the one and sole Reality in the cosmos, and no god or
goddess or power like Satan or Ahirman or any other has reality such as
God’s. God alone js worthy of worship, and the highest end of existence,
that is mukti or {iberation can come through Devotion to God alone, All

being subject to Time, shall pass away. God's Reality alone is eternal and
abiding. Hence behind the shows of things, the Spiritual vision is always
aware of the reality of God. According to this Philosophy, the differences
created by man’s limited thinking which result in selfishness, egoism and
nate are meaningless. Since nothing exists except God; the man of God

sees in all beings the reality of Gad. A few texts from the holy Granth
Sahib will illustrate this point: -

That which is inside man, the same is outside him;

nothing else exists;

By divine Prompting look upon all existence as one and
undifferentiated;

the same fight benetrates all existence, (Sorath M.1.II—bage
599), ,

The Divine (like the lotus) is in the water; yet untouched by
it:

Its light penetrates this water entire;

None is near, and none far;

I find it ever near, and chant its Praises,
Nothing else exists inside or outside (man);
All happens as He wills it:

Listen Pharthari: This is what Nanak says after
contemplation.
124

(Asa M. I Ashtpadiyan I—page 411),
What should the yogi have to fear?

Trees, plants, and all that is inside and outside, is Ha
Himself.

(Gauri Ashtpadiyan M.I, 7 - page 223).

197. Differences are owing to man’s Ignorance of the Supreme ‘Truth,
and to the influence on him of Maya (illusion).Through prayer and
devotion and Divine aid the illusion created by Maya ts lifted, and then

man views the Reality of the universe as one, leaving no scope for hatred,
avarice or egoism.

198. Conception of the Supreme Being. The conception of the
Supreme Reality, i.e. God is fixed in Mul Mantra (The Basic Creed) of the
Sikh faith, which stands at the head of the Guru Granth Sahib and is
considered to be the opening of the holy text of Japuji. Mul Mantra is
chanted and written on all solemn occasions when Divine blessing is
sought to be invoked in any undertaking. In its original form it reads: -

Ek Oankar, Sati-Nam, Karta-Purakh, Nirbhau, Nirvair, Akal
Murati, Ajuni, Saibhang, Guru Prasadi.

Translated into English, this means:- The One Supreme Being;
Eternal Holy Reality; The Creator; Without Fear; Without

Rancour; Timeless Form; Unborn; Self-Existent; Realized
Through Divine Grace.

199, The various elements in the above creed on careful study will yield
the true significance of the Sikh belief and its idea of God. The first veer-
phrase Ek Oankar contains two terms: Ek (One) and Oankar (The
Supreme Being). Oankar comes from the Upanishad and is an extended
form of Om, which is the holiest of all names of God. In the Guru Granth
Sahib Om is also used—once by Guru Nanak and twice by Guru Arjan
Dev. Oankar is the Eternal Reality, above gods and goddesses and is holy
and self-existent. To it, in order to emphasize the idea of the sole Reality
of God, Guru Nanak has added the numeral 1, which in several Indian
languages is pronounced as EK. This EK Cankar is the transcendental,
unattributed Absolute. In other words, it is that which is above all
Existence, has no attributes, since these will limit its absoluteness and
Eternity. In Sukhmani (xxiii.6) it is said:-

Whenever he wills, He creates the vast universe;

As He wills He is again EK Oankar,
125

200. EK Oankar here as elsewhere implies that Reality which is above
and beyond all other existence,

201. The next Phrase, Sati Nam contains two terms, Sati (Satya) is both
Rea! and Holy. Nam is a Spiritual idea, which Stands for the Essence, the

203. Nirbhau (without fear) and Nirvair (without rancour) are two
negative attributes, implying God's absoluteness. Not being subject to any
other being, and not being subject to need, He is fearless. Since He is the
creator of all existence, He is without hate, He is all love, ail benevolence,
Hence in Sikh teaching, God is referred to again and again as Father,
_Implying His love and care for ail creation. ‘

204, Akal, as Said earlier, is Timeless, Eternal. This term is
characteristically Sikh. In numerous Sikh Phrases this term occurs, Akal
is as unmistakably the Sikh name for God, as Allah in the Musitm

206. The last Phrase, Guru-Prasadj implies that God's knowledge or
realization can come to man neither through reasoning or learning nor

126

(glance of compassion), daya (compassion), kirpa (kindness). So, this last
phrase is essential in the enunciation of the basic idea of the Sikh faith.

207. God Without Fear. In the teaching of Sikhism God is conceived
as being without form (nirankar/nirakar). In accordance with this faith,
Guru Nanak is known as Nirankari (Believer in the Formless). No image or
idol or any figurine can represent God, or be worshipped as God. All
existence is God’s visible form, but no part of it is a substitute for God.
God is also Nirguna (unattributed) as said earlier. This means that he is
not subject to the ‘three qualities’ of ignorance (tamas), passion (rajas),
and reasoning intellect (sattva as is all creation or Maya in the different
stages of its evolution). God is eternally perfect. Man’s ideal must also be
to rise above the three qualities of Maya and enter into the divine state of
attributelessness through prayer and devotion. In the state of devotion
or bhakti, God is also believed to have certain noble qualities, such as
love, compassion, fatherly concern for all creation and the upholding of
the moral law in universe. It is through such qualities that He comes close
to humanity and becomes ‘the Beloved of His devotees’ (Bhakta vatsala),
To love He yields, but no other persuasion.

208. Man loves Him for the principle of Goodness and Righteousness that
is in Him. He is mighty and. is constantly intervening in the concerns of
the universe by destroying evif. Thus arrogant tyrants such as Ravana,
Duryodhana and certain. demons in Indian religious history, are destroyed
by God’s might operating through certain God-inspired heroes. This belief
is also shared by certain other great religions. So, God must be
understood to be full of universal fove, but also that Might which destroys
evil and tyranny. The moral law cannot be defied by man with impunity.
Guru Nanak in the hymns on Babar’s invasion points out how the rulers
were humiliated at the hands of Babar’s soldiery, which becanie the
instrument of divine justice.

209. In expressing the idea of God, Guru Nanak and his successors in the
holy office of Guruship have employed some other terms which stand for
the Absolute Reality. The most commonly used in this respect is Brahm.
To give further emphasis to the idea of His transcendental character, this
name is used as Par-Brahm (the Brahm beyond human thought). Guru is
made to signify the human Preceptor as well as God, from whom all
enlightenment and realization proceeds. Guru is also used in the extended
compound form as Gurudev—the Lord Enlightened. Satguru (the holy
master) is another term used for God. Thakur, Sahib, Swami (ali three
mean lord, master) are frequently used. From the current Indian

naan Lis Roane eT Seca

127

phraseology Parmeshwar {the Supreme Lord) is taken. Prabhy (Lord)
always stands for God. Often the epithet Sacha (true, holy, eternal) is

Hukamnama
AuKamnama

210, HUKAMNAMA @ Compound of two Persian words Aukm, meaning
command or order, and Namah, meaning letter, refers in the Sikh
tradition to letters sent by the Gurus to their Sikhs Or Sangats in different
Darts of the country. Currently, the word applies to edicts issued from
time to time from the five takhts Or seats of high religious authorities for
the Sikhs -the Akal Takht at Amritsar, Takht Sri Kesgarh at Anandpur
Sahib (Punjab), Takht Harimandar Sahib at Patna (Bihar), Takht
Sachkhand Sri Hazur Sahib at Nanded (Maharashtra) and Takht

Nisan te Hukamname, edited by Shamsher Singh Ashok (Amritsar, Sikh
Itihas Research Board, Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee,
1967), A Separate anthology of Guru Tegh Bahadur's hukamnamas, in
Devanagari transcription and with an English translation, was published
by Punjabi University, Patiala, in 1976, All hakamnamas were originally
written in Punjabi, in Gurmukhi characters, Those of Gury Hargobind as
also most of Guru Tegh Bahadur’s are believed to have been written in

(it is the order of the revered Guru, or the revered Gury desires),
preceded by the formula Ik Onkar Guru Sati, later Ik Onkar Satigury
(Remember One God, the True Guru), Banda Singh Bahadur (1679-
128

1716), blessed by Guru Gobind Singh himself, introduced a seal in Persian
script as authentication mark and recorded the initial formula to read as
Ik Onker Fateh Darsanu (God is One, Victory to (His) Presence), and the
text began with Sache Sahib ai agia hai (by order of the True Master),
Hukamnamas of Mata Sundari begin with the words Sri Mata Ji di agia hai,
and those of Mata Sahib Devi with Sri Akal Purakh ji ka Khalisa Sri Mata
Sahib Devi ji di agia hai (Mata Sahib Devi's order to the Khalsa of the
Timeless One),

211. Apart from their importance to the Sikhs as the sacred
remembrances of the Gurus, the Aukamnamas are invaluable historical
documents. Names of persons and places to which they are addressed
provide clues to the composition, socially, of early Sikhism and its spread,
geographically. One of the earliest huakmnamas discovered is a missive
addressed by Guru Hargobind (1595-1644) to sangats at Patna,
Alamganj, Sherpur, Bina and Monghyr, in Bihar, and includes no fewer
than 62 names of prominent Sikhs belonging to those communities.
Hukamnamas of Guru Tegh Bahadur (1621-75) and Guru Gobind Singh
(1666-1708) are addressed to sangats as far apart as Dhaka, Chittagong
and Sylhet in the east and Patan, present-day Pakpattan, in Pakistan in
the west. In addition to blessings from the Gurus and acknowledgement
of the devotees’ gifts, these letters contain instructions for the followers
to cultivate love and prayer as well as indications with regard to the
offerings they might bring. The demands ranged from cash contribution in
the form of gold or Aundis (bills of exchange) to pet birds, garments,
weapons, cannons and war elephants. Sometimes these demands are
written in abbreviated forms. The hukamnamas, which are dated, help to
fix the chronology of certain events. For instance, letters instructing Sikhs
not to recognize masands, or tithe-collectors, but to bring their offerings
directly to the Guru on the occasions of Baisakhi and Divali are all written
during 1699 or later, confirming the abolition of the institution of masands
simultaneously with the creation of the Khalsa on 30 March 1699, The
almost identical letters, both dated i Kartik 1764 Bk/2 October 1707,
while informing the sangats at Dhaul and Khara of Guru Gobind Singh’s
meeting with the Emperor (Bahadur Shah), enjoined upon them to
present themselves duly armed when the Guru arrived. in Kahlur
(Anandpur). This was not to be, for the Guru passed away at Nanded, in
the South, a year later, but the Guru's intention of returning to the Punjab
is clearly established. The hukamnamas are important linguistically as
well and provide crucial clues for tracing the development of the-
Gurmukhi script and Punjabi prose.

©UUYHSVYGHES

ee

129

HUMAI (Ego)

212. HUMAI (Ego) - The term Aaumai is a compound of two pronouns
hau and mai each meaning ‘I’, and thus, haumai means ‘I, I’. The ancient
Indian term, for haumai has been aham-kara—I-maker’ or ‘I-doer’. In the
Chhandogya Upanisad, it (sham-kara) is equated. with atman or soul,
conceived as the immanent Divinity. But, its most popular sense, later,
was the one attached to it in the Sankhya philosophy viz. it is a mental
organ or function, evolved from matter, and mediating between the
material and the spiritual. In Buddhism, it has two slightly varying
meanings viz. ‘mind invelved in I-making-mine-making conceit’ and ‘the
bias of I-making-mine-making from the aham-kara that all actions spring.
According to the Pali Pitakas, springs of action are six, three being roots
of good, three of bad actions or three of moral and three of immoral. The
three roots of bad actions are greed (/obha}, hate (dosa) and want of
intelligence (moha); the other three are their opposites—detachment,
love and intelligence. Modern Mahayanists hold that in the Bodhisattva
theory, altruism as opposed to egoism takes a more prominent position,
and the goal of nirvana is not one of personal salvation but of transferred
merit, saintly aspiration being for the salvation of all beings.

213. In English, the word nearest to haumai is ego which,
metaphysically, from the Latin root, means ‘a conscious thinking subject’
as opposed to ‘non-ego’ or object—thus, it stands for the ‘self’, soul and
spirit. The term ‘egoism’, ethically, stands for the theory which holds the
self-interest to be the foundation of Morality, and the egoist, thus, is
systematically selfish and self-opinionated. An egocentric is, as we call it, |
self-centred. An egoist can think of nothing else, but of ‘I’ and ‘me’, and
is invariably ‘talking about himself’, in ‘self-conceit’ and ‘selfishness’.
Duality too has been recognized in the ego, and thus, ego is subject-
consciousness and object consciousness, or, of ‘I’ and ‘Me’—it is not
dualism of essentially different substances, but it is of such a nature as to
form together one individual conscious being. Again, a distinction has
been drawn between Theoretical egoism or the Subjective Idealism which
maintains that one’s own individual ego is the only being that a man can
logically assert to exist; and the Practical egoism which has three forms—
logical, aesthetic and moral, according to Kant. A logical egoist considers
it unnecessary to bring his own judgement to the test of another's
understanding; the aesthetic egoist is fully satisfied with his own tastes:
and the moral egoist makes himself the end of all his activities—nothing is
valuable unless it benefits him. In ethics, egoism maintains that the
standard of conduct for the individual is: his own good on the whole. So,
130

the inclinations and purposes of an egoist are immediately and exclusively
directed towards himself; he, in his consciousness, thinks about himself
and his own immediate interests only, is self-centred and. self-
opinionated.

214. Egoism is based on an atomistic conception of society viz. every
social whole is composed of individuals, the nature of each one of whom
is to preserve his own life, to seek his own good, to satisfy his own
desires; and good and evil are relative to the individual. But is is a false

_ conception, as no man is self-contained. An individual’s interests are not

different from the interests of the society or of all members of the
community. Every individual is a member of an organic whole and the
complete good is the good of the whole of which he is a member. Higher
men realize their true good by denying what appears to be their private
good, and they so far identify themselves with their state or church that
they are content to die so that the institution may live. Self-interest, self-
conceit, self-seeking and self-reference—all become irretevant to them.

215. Using the term haumai, viz. I-ness and My-ness, Guru Nanak has |
given his view of haumai most comprehensively in sloka VII.I of the Asa-
di-var (ode in the Asa Measure). At the same place, in another sloka, his
first successor, Guru Angad, has also tried to interpret the view of Guru
Nanak on the subject. Guru Nanak’s sloka, referred-to in the above,
reads, in English translation, as this:-

In ego man comes, in ego he goes,

In ego he is born, in ego he dies.

In ego he gives in ego he receives,

In ego he earns, in ego he loses.

In ego he is true or false,

In ego he has considerations of sin and virtue.
In ego he descends to hell or rises to heaven,
In ego he laughs, in ego he weeps.

In ego he begrimes, in ego he washes himself,

In ego he is misled into the considerations of castes and
kinds

ls

SBOOUCHHOSHSHUUYHHHHHUHUYVYVHHHHHHHE

@0GUGIHU WE

131

In ego he is foolish, in ego he is wise,

And loses. all sense of salvation and liberation.

In ego he is absorbed in Maya (illusion),

In ego he is overtaken by delusion.

In ego are men born as creatures

Man can See the Gate, if he understands his ego,
Without realization, all talk of ego that entangles a man.
Nanak, under the Supreme Will our record is made,

As one sees the one, we perceive the other. (Asa-di-var
VIII)

216. In the light of the above sloka, Guru Nanak’s view of haumai can be
constructed as this:-

(a) Humai is a creation of the Supreme Being as it comes into
existence under His Will. He is the master of the play of life. The
whole play of life is caused by the presence of ego in man which
gives rise to the conflict between the higher and lower selves.

(b) Haumai is a condition of the mind. Mind itself is born of the
five elements which are the objects of the five senses of sight,
hearing, smell, taste and touch, That is, Hauma/ is material and not
spiritual in its basic nature,

(c) Haumai (I-ness, My-ness) is so powerful an instinct that it
influences each and every activity of man (or animal) throughout
the course of his existence which may run into myriads of births and
lives. Ego is the basis of his transmigration from life to life, serves
as the initial force or motive in all his actions, directs every choice
of man—true or false, good or evil, painful or pleasurable.

(d) Hauma? is that condition of mind which keeps man ignorant of
the true reality, the true Purpose of his life, and thus keeps him
away from salvation’and union with God.
‘conduct itself in a healthy way. But, again, Guru Angad assures

“been called ahamkar, mana, chit, budhi, bibek, etc. But mind is

132

(e) Guru Angad has described haumaf as a deep-rooted disease.
So far as it remains as the condition of the mind, it (mind) cannot

that the word of the Guru is the medicine which can cure the
disease of ego.

(f) An egoist everywhere sees the projection of his own mind
only.

(g) One hears the word of the Guru when the Supreme Being
Himself blesses him with His grace. The will of the Supreme binds a
man to transmigration while His grace liberates him from that
bondage of the cycle of births and deaths. Ego binds a man, grace
liberates.

(h) Ego is the basis of individuality which at once separates one
from the totality of life or cosmic and social life. This separation
gives the idea of preservation of the self which leads to struggle for
existence.
(Gj) The idea of struggle for existence makes the egoist self-
seeking, conceited, self-assertive, selfish and proud. As he secures
his interests and himself, he develops a complex of superiority. He
begins to feel proud of his caste, birth, country, creed, colour, SEX,
prowess, learning, culture, conduct, rituals, etc. Thus, he begins to
feel that he is born to rule while others are there to serve his will
and carry out his order. They are just the means to preserve and
watch his interests.

(k) Guru Nanak has no where given a hint that haumai can be
purified and trained to serve nobler purposes or to work for the
salvation of man. According to him ‘ego’ constitutes the wall of
separation between God and man. So, this has to be completely
removed; it is to be burnt, destroyed and eliminated altogether.

(1) However, mind or consciousness is a great power. tf mind
becomes pure, it realizes God. Mind is not merely ego; it has the
powers of cognition, perception, understanding, reasoning and right
discrimination. These functions of mind in Indian terminology, have

purified only when the ego is banished completely. Mind must be rid

133

of ego. Guru Granth describes ego as disease, falsehood, wall,
dross, dirt, poison, etc. Mind, to be healthy, must get rid of the
disease, falsehood, separation, dross, dirt and poison. When ego is
banished nobler and higher faculties of mind come into play.

(m) In the total scheme of God, ego makes the play of the world
possible by creating the conflict between spirit and matter or good
or evil. Ego is not what is called the free will as opposed to |
determinism. Man has no free will. His entire course is determined
by the will of God. God Himself puts him on the path of evil or good,
so called, for in fact the duality of evil and good also does not exist.

(mn) The Guru Granth calls the egoist as manmukh or sakat. He is
mind-oriented and follows the irrational carnal urges of lust, anger,
avarice, attachment and pride. He is thoroughly a materialist and is
bound to the material Joys. He is always double minded, vacillating
between God and Mammon. When man shakes off ego, he merges
his self with the cosmic self. Such a man considers himself as a
drop in the ocean of life and understands that his good or interest is
common with the good of the other members of the human society
or family. Such a man identifies himself with the society. He has no
individual interests. An egoist does everything with desire for
reward or fruit for himself while a non-egoist is niskanj (desireless)
in all his actions.

217. In the Sidhgoshti (A Dialogue with the Siddhas), Guru Nanak (vide
stanze-68) says that an egoist creates a world of his own life. The spider
who weaves a web out of his ownself and is entangled in it and is thus
killed ultimately by his own false creation. An egoist lives in an imaginary
world of his own wherein he himself matters the most and remains the
centre of the entire universe or a small circle of his relatives is all that
matters. In selfishness, he thinks of his own saivation only and resorts to
the so-called religious acts of supposed merit such as dips at the so-called
holy places, alms-deeds, austeritier, meditation, | samadhis
(concentrations), recitations, mortification, etc. (Asa-di-var, VITI-2, also
ibid, IX, I, IV.2). So-called men of religious piety who sin against others
by discriminating against them on grounds of caste, creed, birth, position,
sex, learning, and claim superiority for themselves for observing Shradh
or sutak or purity of the cooking-squares are indeed egoists. They do not
meditate on the Name and live in a fool’s paradise that these rituals and
religious practices would save them, Similarly, men of power, wealth,
Position, beauty and bravery are proud, and in their egoism, care not a fig

for the feelings of others, behave like tyrants, do high-handedness; but
they also live in a world of their own fabrication as they have to reap the
fruit of what they had sown. Being forgetful of the Name, all these men of
ego suffer terribly.

In ego, a world springs up, O man,
Forgetting the Name, this world suffers.

A Gurmukh thinks of knowledge and truth, and burns ego by
the word of the Guru.

He is pure in mind, thought and word,
he merges with the True One. (Sidhgoshti, 68)

218. A Gurmukh is the antithesis of an egoist. He mediates on the Name
and so purifies his mind that all the evil and selfish tendencies leave him.
This is banishing of the ego. There is no other remedy for the otherwise
incurable disease of ego. Mediation on the Name alone can banish ego
and make one the servant of God. The disciple of the Name inculcates in
the devotee the virtues of temperance, honest, non-attachment,
moderation, gratitude and love of the Lord. These are the qualities of a
servant of God too. This plane of character guarantees the state of bliss
and continuous pleasure to a Gurmukh.

219. Guru Nanak is more concerned with practical life than theorising. In
bani, he has placed haurna/ in opposition to Hukam (Supreme Will), Seva
(service), Gyan (discriminating knowledge), Sehj (poise, middle-path),
Nam (meditation, devotion) and Nirlaip (non-attachment).

220. In the Japu (pauri IT), with which the Guru Granth opens, he has
placed haumai in opposition to the Supreme Will or human, saying that
one can be a man of realization and truthfulness only if he conducts
himself in accordance with the Supreme Will. He has drawn some sort of
distinction between order and will, as it is the will which creates order.
God is absolutely free to ordain an order. His will creates the order which
works in the cosmic evolution and course. By His will: all forrns come into
being, they develop life, grow exalted, become good or evil, receive pain
or pleasure, win Grace and get liberation or are doomed forever in
transmigration, etc.; but an egoist is led to believe, erroneously, that he
can transgress the will or order and by his efforts or actions develop, get
exalted, become good, get pleasure, and win liberation. By such thinking,
he denies, not only the Supremacy of the Divine Will, but the
135

absoluteness of the Supreme Being Itself. The Guru asserts that ‘all are
subject to the Supreme Will, none outside its Pale’, but the egoist asserts
that he is beyond the pale of the Supreme Will and thus he feels not the
need of being devoted to that and meditating on the Name. The Guru
asserts that a cosmic order exists, the egoist does not recognize this and
feels that he can defy any order or rule. He does not care for the rules
which make a man really exalted or otherwise, great or otherwise, and
bring suffering or pleasure. He is selfish, seif-willed, self-seeking and sins
against the common interests of society or community. He defies the
social laws. The egoist does not understand the supremacy of the will
though it is there. He suffers for his ignorance as he constantly sins
against humanity. He is not a responsible being and does not contribute
to the total good of mankind by following higher and nobler tendencies
which too are present in his mind. He is narrow in outlook. We must
attune our wili to the Supreme-will, our self to the higher self, and choose
the higher course of good which may result In the good of all,

221. As already referred to, Guru Nanak has placed haumai in opposition
to seva or service of God which also means service of mankind. The man
who wants to serve God must attune his ego to the Supreme-will. For
this, he need develop a certain pattern of life. In opposition to this stoka
on ego, the Guru has given the character of a servant of God as under:

The service of God is done by the men of temperate lives
who meditate on Him as the truest of the true,

They refrain from treading the path of evil, and doing good,
practise honesty. :

They have broken the bonds of worldliness, and eat and
drink moderately.

“Thou art lavish in They mercies, of which Thou givest daily
ever-increasingly”—

thus glorifying they obtain the glorious Lord. (Asa-di-var,
VII)

222, The conflict between ego and will-to-serve is removed when man,
through the grace of Guru and God, meditates on the Name. By
meditation and devotion, his will gets attuned to the will of the Supreme,
Meditation on the Name gives him a set character which is temperate,
refrains from the path of evil, practises honesty, is unattached to the
world, eats and drinks moderately and thus obtains the Lord. A man of

136

meditation believes that God is the giver of every gift and He gives
through His mercy and gives ever-increasingly, while an egoist believes
just the other way. He lives for himself oniy, lives intemperately, eats and
drinks immoderately, and earns by hook or by crook, not caring the least
for honesty. An egoist is bound or attached to the world; he is attached to
his own interests; he cares for the need of his family only and with that
his circle ends. A servant of God looks after the needs of the humanity,
the society and the community. He breaks the bonds of the body and the
family or narrow considerations. Mankind is his family.

223. Ego and right knowledge are always in opposition. In a hymn
(No.33) of Sri rag, Guru Nanak emphasizes that a man of service who
alone is honoured in the court of the Lord, is a man of right
discrimination; he is a man of enlightenment which comes through living
according to the teachings of the holy books, under the fear of the Lord
and by knowing the truth. This man goes beyond the attractions and
charms of Maya and is not deceived by it, while a greedy man, an egoist,
always vacillates. The jamp of the mind, the Guru says, is lighted this
wayi-

If we practise the teachings of the holy books, If we put the
wick of the Lord’s fear in the lamp of the mind,

If we give it the fire of truth:—

This, then, is the oil, and this is how the lamp is lighted.
If the inside is lit like this,

then the Lord is obtained.

224. A man who is impressed by the word of the Guru, adopts such a
way of life. He surrenders himself completely to the will of the Lord. He
fears the Lord. An egoist does not care for the word of the Guru, nor for
truth, nor for the Supreme-will. He believes that his own intellect is
supreme and he can make no error, A man of pure intellect will serve
mankind, not an egoist.

225. Ego and bhakti (nam-bhekti) do not go together. Guru Amardas
(Vadhans, Pada-ix) has emphatically stated that hauma/ (ego) and nam
(meditation on the Name) are in direct conflict, the two can never dwell in
the same mind. Guru Nanak (Asa, Ashtpadi-II), portraying the life of a
man of meditation, says that externally he also appears to be a man of

ae

Re

Sd

ww Ww wy

ve]

w ew

eG?

137

ego as he lives in the world and earns and spends like all men, but he
then clarifies, he is unattached in his mind.

Outwardly he is an egoist,

He appears to behave and eat like that;
But he is liberated inwardly,

he is never attached,

226. A bhakta lives in the world, earns and spends, rears up family,
brings up his children. But still he shares his earnings with others. He
lives temperately and moderately. He can save to spend in the service of
man. A servant of God can never be proud and egotistical. Meditation on
the Nam gives non-attachment.

227. Haumai is, in fact, a denial of God, the Supreme Reality: it is the
denial of the existence of a cosmic order, it is the denial of the oneness of
the human society; it is denial of the path of love, knowledge, service and
devotion’ it is living in an imaginary world of own fancy; it is living in
constant conflict with all else in the creation. But it is God’s own creation
to serve as an instrument of the play of life which He enjoys. God also
sends the Guru to free men of the grip of haumai so that they may be
reclaimed to God. The Guru is sent to mankind as God’s grace to it. He
banishes Aauma/ root and branch and unites man with God again.

Jhatka Meat

228. JHATKA, the Sikh mode of killing an animal for food, also stands
for the meat of an animal or bird so killed. Derived, etymologically, from
jhat, an adverb meaning instantly, immediately or at once, jhatka
signifies a jerk, snap, jolt or a swift blow. For Sikhs jhatka karna or
Jhatkauna means to slaughter the animal instantaneously, severing the
head with a single stroke of any weapon or killing with gunshot or
electrocution. The underlying idea is to kill the animal with the minimum
of torture to it. Jhatka is opposed to kuttha, that is meat of an animal
slaughtered by a slow process in the Muslim way known as halal (lit.
legal, legitimate, lawful). Kuttha is a participle derived from the Punjabi
verb kohna (lit. to torture). While slaughtering for food, a Muslim must
incise the throat of the animal to the accompaniment of the exclamation
of the kalima, the Islamic formula meaning "By the name of Allah, the
Merciful and Compassionate." For jhatka, a Sikh while delivering the blow
may utter Sat Sri Akal (lit. True is the Timeless Lord), which is both a
138

Sikh war slogan and a salutation, but there is no idea of sacrifice or ritual
involved in such utterance, and it is not mandatory either. Sikhism does
not sanction sacrificial or ritual killing.

x 229. Historically, there is no positive injunction enforcing jhatka mode of
slaughter laid down by the Gurus. However, Guru Gobind Singh, when
7 manifesting the order of the Khalsa in 1699, enjoined upon Sikhs to
vi abstain from kuttha or halal meat introduced by the Muslim ruling class.
That many high-ranking Hindus had succumbed to the practice of eating
: kuttha is evidenced from a verse of Guru Nanak's in Asa ki Var: “They eat
7 kuttha of goats killed with the pronouncement of alien words, i.e. kalima,
but do not allow anyone to enter their cooking square (to guard against
pollution by touch). . .” Instructions regarding jhatka mode of slaughter
4 are contained in various Rahitnamas or codes of conduct for the Sikhs,
th and the Sikh chronicles written during the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries. They all affirm that Guru Gobind Singh made the taking of
1 kuttha one of the four major kurahits, or violations of the Sikh code of
|. conduct. However, two of these sources say positively: "Kill the male goat
in the jhatka way if you want to eat, but do not ever look at any other
type of meat" (Rahitnama of Bhai Desa Singh), and "Slaughter male
goats through jhatka and eat; do net go near carrion or kuttha" (Ratan
Singh Bhangu, Prachin Panth Prakash). Rahitnama of Bhai Desa Singh
also enjoins the slaughtering to be carried out away from the kitchen.
7 Traditionally, it is also to be away from a holy spot. The mention of male
i|| goat in the chronicles is only illustrative and does not exclude other
1 animals or birds the flesh of which the Sikhs usually eat.

: i 230, Not many Sikhs are habitually meat-eaters. Their staple diet mainly
consists of cereals, pulses, vegetables and milk products. Some of their

Th: sects even practise strict vegetarianism. The Sikh religion however
neither recommends nor prohibits the eating of flesh. During their own

rule in Punjab, the Sikhs practised tolerance and never tried to enforce 5
jhatka on their. Muslim subjects. But during the British rule, the
| predominating Muslim community in western Punjab opposed jhatka.

i Even at government jevel, jhatka was not allowed in jails and Sikh

| detenues during the Akali movement and after had to resort to protests

' and agitations to secure this right. One of the terms in the settlement
between the Akalis and the Muslim-dominated Unionist government in the
Punjab in 1942 was that the use of jhatka meat would be permissible in
public institutions.

139

Jivan-Mukta

231. JIVAN-MUKTA , in Sikhism the ideal and aim or objective of man’s
spiritual life. The term is derived from Jivan-mukti Givanslife;
mukti=release, liberation, Emancipation freedom from bondage), and

Ultimate while stil] living. The idea of Mukti is encountered, with some
conceptual variations, in Practically all religious faiths, @.9. moksa in
Hinduism, nirvana in Buddhism, Nijat in Islam and Salvation in
Christianity. The belief underlying the concept of mukti is, that the soul, a
particle of the Supreme Soul, is, while embedded in the physical frame, in
a state of viyog or Separation and longs for Sanyog or reunion with its
source, which for it is the supreme bliss,

incarnation cycle. Whatever the soteriological means, the end is usually
sought in the cessation of incarnate existence, Besides this idea of videh
(incorporeal) mukti, however, ‘references to the concept of Jivan-mukti

in the Preceding generations by sages and men of piety. But, as in the
case of numerous other concepts, the expression mukti is invested with a
new meaning in their bani. It is no longer the annihilation of human
existence but the Spiritual quality of one's life that serves as the central
Principle in the Sikh conception of mukti. The body constitutes no barrier
between the soul and the Supreme Soul. On the contrary, "the body is
the fort limitless wherein resides He, the Cherisher Himself" (GG, 514),
"Within the body resides the Ineffable One; the manmukh (the self-willed)
fool does not know this and roams abroad in search of Him" (GG, 754).
Guru Arjan goes to the extent of rejecting mukti in the traditional sense of
@ post-death state and substitutes it with constant love of the Divine as
the ideal state of being (GG, 534).

140

233. The root cause of the alienation of the human soul from its Supreme
source is avidya (ignorance), according to the Vedantic way. In
Le Buddhism, where nirvana means soul's freedom from suffering, the cause
. of suffering is trsna (craving). The Gurus, however, hold haumai (the
individuating sense of ego or I-ness) as the cause of ignorance, craving

| and bondage, as also of suffering. If liberation is sought, it is not from life
i: | or body but from the shackles of ego. Guru Nanak's definition of jivan-
ion mukta, therefore, is in terms of the negation of egoism:- —

He alone is liberated while still living |
Hi Who is cleansed of the ego inside (GG, 1010).

234, The state of egolessness is the state of perfect detachment, not of
renunciation, nor of self-mortification.The jivan-mukta of Sikh conception
is the realized soul, identified as gurmukh (one whose face is turned
towards God). He leads the life of a common householder enriched by the
yo experience of spiritual harmony within. "He surrenders himself completely
to the Will of God; joy and sorrow are the same to him; he experiences
bliss always and viyog (separation) never" (GG, 275). Instead of the
differentiating ego, the all-encompassing Divine Spirit resides in him.
Existentially he belongs to the world, essentially he transcends the world.

235. A variant. of the term jivan-mukti in gurbani is dying-in-life (jivat
marna). The paradoxical expression of dying while alive is employed by
the Gurus in order to stress the importance of abandoning one type of life
and the adoption of another. It is dying to’ the life of haumai, of ‘five
evils', and entering into a life of contemplation, altruism and love of God.
The person attaining to the state of jivat-marna, in this sense, is the one
qualified for the designation of jivan-mukta. He or she is the one who has
realized the essence of human life, the essential life, concealed under the
sheaths of egoism, of ignorance, passion, avarice, pride and infatuation.

236. The ideal state of jivan-mukta is, notionally, within the reach of
every ‘human being, since anyone following an ethical and spiritual course
faithfully, may receive the nadar (God's grace. or blessing). Yet, as the
Gurus point out, rare are the individuals who actually arrive at the
summit. The blessed few, fulfilled by the experience of Supreme
realization, set out to serve their companions. They strive for the total
ne well-being of fellow men, in all spheres of existence. However, the
hi] success of a jivan-mukta in heralding an order of enlightened individuals
or the Kingdom of God on earth, is not to be measured in terms of the
humber of "converts" to his way of life, but in terms of the model of
humane, and enlightened living he presents for emulation.

14]

Kam

—=_

237, KAM meaning desire, longing, concupiscence, sensuality or
lasciviousness, is counted among the five cardinal sins or sinful
propensities. In common usage, the term stands for Passion for sexual
pleasure and it is in this sense that it is considered an evil in Sikhism. In
Brahmanical literature kam is not always disdained. Kam as Kamadeva is

horror. For munis and Sramanas of Jainism and Buddhism and for yogis of
the Sankhya school, kam was to be deliberately suppressed to achieve
ultimate release. As a result, they preached celibacy and asceticism.

Sikhism kam is not unrestricted gratification of carnal desires, but an
impulse which needs to be kept under check like other impulses and
Passions. Unrestrained Propensity towards kam, especially sexual
relationship outside. the marital bond, is condemned in the strongest

afflictast high and low alike " (GG, 1358). Guru Tegh Bahadur, Nanak IX,
Says: "In the sinning heart reigns kam and the fickle mind breaks out of
control. Kam casts its noose even upon yogis, jangams and sannyasis,
Only those imbued with God's Name (fall not a prey to it) and are able to
g9 across the ocean of existence” (GG, 1186). Bhai Gurdas describes an
ideat Sikh as one who is loyal to his wife and “regards all other women as
Mothers, sisters and daughters" (Varan, XXIX, 11). Guru Gobind Singh
also said: "Love your own wedded wife ever so more, but do not go to
another woman's bed even in a dream." Sikh codes of conduct strictly
Prohibit extramarital relations.

239. While prescribing self-control and restraint and not total annihilation
of kam, the Gurus suggested two ways of channelizing and sublimating it.
On the one hand, they pronounced grihastha or married life to be the
ideal one, and, on the other laid down love of God and absorption in His
Name as the essential Principle of spiritual discipline. Says Guru Gobind
Singh, "Hear ye all, I proclaim here the truth: only they who love God find
Him." The image of a devotee most common in Sikh Scripture is one of a
wife deeply in love with her kant or husband Presently separated from
him, and waiting, craving, praying for a reunion with him. Such fervent
devotion cannot but bridle the wayward passion in man. According to
Guru Arjan, a person who has cultivated the love of the Lord‘s feet would
desire neither kingship, nor worldly power, nor even mukti or liberation
(GG 534),

KARAH PRASAD

240. KARAH PRASAD. Karah, soft sweetened food made of flour or
semolina and ghee, which placed before the Guru Granth Sahib as
offering gets transubstantiated for Sikhs into prasad, i.e. a mark of Akal-
Purakh's grace. Karah Prasad is thus the sacrament which is distributed
among the sangat after ardas at all Sikh religious services and
ceremonies. The word karah is derived from Sanskrit katah which means
a large boiling pan, and what is cooked therein by the specific formula
has, by transference of meaning, come to be called karah. In Sikh
parlance, this communion food is also known by several other names such
as deg, tihaval or tribhavali (lit. made of three ingredients of equal
quantity, viz. ghee or clarified butter, wheat-flour and sugar) and
Panchamrit (most blessed sacrament). Karah is common to some other
religious traditions as well, Muslims, who call it halva, prepare it in large
quantities on the occasion of Eid. Karah was also offered among the
ancient Aryans to the deities and idols as lapasi,

241. For karah prasad meant for offering at a Sikh assembly, its main
ingredients, ghee, wheat-flour and sugar, must be weighed out in equal
measures. The cooking-place or kitchen must be cleaned to ensure
sanctity as well as hygienic standards, and a person cleanly dressed
should be ready to take charge of the Proceedings in the prescribed
manner. Reciting the holy hymns, water, four.times the weight of one of
the ingredients, will be heated and sugar poured into it to dissolve and
the mixture brought to boiling point in an open pan, called karahi or
karaha, more ceremonially, deg; then ghee is heated and the wheat flour
is fried and roasted brown in it. The syrup of sugar is then poured down

143

into the pan and stirred. The Preparation, properly made, will show ghee
floating around the sweet substance. It is then transferred to some other
pan, generally a large salver, and is covered with a clean white piece of
linen, and taken to the presence of the Guru Granth Sahib in gurdwara or
site of the assembly, before the service is concluded with ardas. The
karah prasad is touched with the tip of a kirpan or sword before it Is
distributed. Then, the granthi, or any other pious Sikh, puts in a saucer,
the symbolic 'shares' of Panj Piare, i.e. the Five Beloved and distributes it
among five amritdhari Sikhs of approved standing from among the
assembly. After this, some volunteers, generally led by the granthi,
distribute the hely sacrament among the sangat, without any distinction
of status or caste. Every one, whatever his worldly position or station,
must receive prasad while sitting on the floor, with both hands piously
cupped. It is partaken of as a mark of receiving divine grace, This
tradition of offering karah prasad in a gurdwara is traced back to Guru
Arjan, who himself went to the Harimandar to offer prasad on certain
occasions.

242. Ordinarily, karah prasad is prepared in the gurdwara itself, but
people are free to prepare it, in the prescribed manner and with due care,
at home. and bring it to be offered at the gurdwara. In the larger
gurdwaras which are under the control of tHe Shiromani Gurdwara
Parbandhak Committee, Amritsar, there are set counters from which
readymade karah prasad is available on cash payment, generally in
multiples of one and a quarter of a rupee. The devotees then carry it
reverentially into the sanctuary. ;

243. The deg or karah prasad is compulsory offering at all Sikh
ceremonies and observances. However, on less important occasions or if
the devotee at whose instance the divan takes place cannot afford it,
other and less expensive types of prasad can be offered. These
substitutes are limited to four commodities, viz., patasas (sugar crystals),
gur {unclarified sugar), pha/ (fruit) and makhanas or lachidana (sugar
plums). Other sweets are not ordinarily offered as prasad, but are not
forbidden,

Karma, The Doctrine of Life

244. KARMA, THE DOCTRINE OF LIFE, closely connected with the
theory of rebirth and transmigration, is basic to the religious traditions of
Indian origin such as Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism and Sikhism. The term
karam, as it is spelt in Punjabi and as it occurs in Sikh Scripture, the Guru
Granth Sahib, has three connotations. Asan inflection of Sanskrit karman

144

from root kri (to do, perform, accomplish, make, cause OF effect) it means
an act, action, deed. It also stands for fate, destiny, predestination
inasmuch as these result from one's actions or deeds. Also, Karam as a
word of Arabic origin is synonymous with nadar or Divine grace or
clemency. It is with the first two connotations that the doctrine of karma
ig mainly concerned, although karam as God's grace is also relevant to
the ultimate eradication of karma bringing moksa or liberation from the
cycle of birth, death and rebirth.

245. According to the law of karma, every action, physical or mental, has
its own consequence which must be faced either in this life or in the lives
to come. In the Indian religious traditions, the doctrine of karma, for this
reason, is linked with the doctrines and processes of reincarnation and
transmigration. Some western philosophers of yore also believed in
transmigration, but for them it was associated with the concept of
immortality of the soul. In indian religious thought, on the other hand,
transmigration is an essential concomitant of karma. It is to reap the
consequence of his previous karma that an individual self (jiva) takes his
next birth, but, in the very process of acting out this consequence, the
jiva creates further chains of actions thus setting in motion an endless
cycle of birth-action-death-rebirth. This has been described as the "karmic
wheel" of alternating birth and death with fresh karma keeping the wheel
in endless motion until the chain is broken through the annihilation of
karma, and the Jiva attains moksa (liberation or release from
transmigration). Different traditions within the Indian religious system
recommend different means to break the karmic cycle ranging from
austerities, renunciation and non-action {0 ritualism, philosophic
knowledge, devotion and fruitful action.

246, The Gurus accepted the doctrine of Karma not as an immutable law
but as a system of Nature subject to hukam (Divine Order) and nadar
(Divine grace)—two concepts which might be described as Guru Nanak's
contribution to Indian religious thought. Hukam, a Persian term meaning
command or decree, control or direction, sanction or permission, occurs in
Guru Nanak's hymns in several different but related connotations such as
Divine law, Divine will or Divine pleasure (bhana, raza); Divine fiat (amar,
farman); Divine power or Divine creation (qudarat). Nadar, though
justifiably translated as grace, is somewhat different from its usage in
Christian theology where the stress is upon its universal! nature and
absolute sufficiency for salvation. In Sikhism, nadar is related to Divine
pleasure (raza) and somewhat close to “election” of neo-Caivinist
theology except that it leaves no scope for individual's free will.

ey

‘eA

oF ey

ee

ter

145

247. The doctrine of karma, according to Sikh belief, is a Part of the
Divine law (Aukam). "The whole universe,” Says Guru Arjan, Nanak V, "is
bound by action, good or bad" (GG, 51). Guru Nanak declares in the Japy
that "all forms, beings, greatness and lowliness, pain and pleasure,
bounties and wanderings are subject to the indescribable hukam and
there is nothing outside the realm of hukam," (GG, 1) and then adds that
"karma determines the kapra, i.e. body or birth we receive and that it is
through nadar (God's grace) that one secures the threshold of moksa"

248. While the actions of other species are mostly regulated by
instinctive response to environmental stimuli, man, endowed with a

a rare chance for the individual soul Givatma)., Guru Nanak Says: "Listen,
listen to my advice, O my mind! Only good deeds shall endure, and there
may not be a second chance." Certain points in the Sikh view of karma

Further, past actions do not determine the caste or status of the jiva
taking birth. All human beings are born equal.

of activity and responsibility lived with humility, devotion and service
guided by proper knowledge of Aukam and submission to God's will
(raza). Here Sikhism synthesizes the three paths to union with the
Supreme soul, viz. jnana marga, bhakti marga and karma marga. A Sikh
is called upon to seek gian (nana), knowledge spiritual as well as secular,
mundane and moral, practise bhakti, loving devotion, while leading a
normal life of a gurmukh or one whose face is turned towards the Guru.
His actions (karma) guided by discernment that comes from gian and with
the dedication and complete self-surrender of a bhakta, should be

146

performed earnestly and honestly, doing full justice to his worldly duties.

Yet he should not let himself be so much attached and entangled in the <:

bonds of present life as to ignore the. hereafter and to forget his ultimate
goal which is reunion of his individual soul with its original source, the
Supreme Spirit. Such disinterested actions help annihilate man's haumai
(I-ness, ego) and, when blessed by God's nadar or mihar, he can
overcome the effect of past: karma and become Jivan-makta, i.e. one
liberated while stiil living.

Katha

250. KATHA is the noun form of the Sanskrit word kath, meaning to
speak, describe, narrate or interpret. In religious terminology, katha
stands for exposition, analysis and discussion of a passage from a

- Scripture. It involves a full-length discourse on a given text, with a proper

enunciation of it and elucidation with anecdotes, parables and quotations,
of the underlying spiritual and theological doctrines and ideas. Since
scriptural utterances and verses were generally pithy and aphoristic, they
needed to be expounded for the laity and there emerged in the Indian
tradition forms such as tika (paraphrase), sabdartha (gloss) and bhasya
(commentary) with pramanas or suitablé authoritative quotations from
religious and didactic works to support the thesis or interpretation. These
three modes of elucidation converge in the Sikh katha which is verbal in
form. Katha of the Upanisads, the Bhagavadgita and Puranas and of the
epics, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, has continued to be delivered
from the rostrum. But in Sikhism it has become institutionalized as part of
service at major religious assemblies.

251. The tradition of katha in Sikhism has its formal beginning in the
time of Guru Arjan (1563-1606), who compiled the Sikh Scripture, Guru
Granth Sahib, and who is said to have ordained Bhai Gurdas, who had
transcribed the Holy Volume, to expound briefly and precisely, daily a
hymn which had been read from the Guru Granth Sahib. The masands,
i.e. sangat leaders, appointed by the Gurus, started delivering katha ina
like manner at local gatherings. Since sabda forms the essential base of
Sikh spirituality and religion, correct interpretation of the sacred texts is
of the utmost importance. Guru Gobind Singh (1666-1708) is said to have
himself instructed Bhai Mani Singh in the explication of the Holy Writ.
From Bhai Mani Singh originates what is known as the Giani school of
interpretation of gurban/. The performance of katha has continued in the
Sikh system over the centuries. There are numerous institutions, classical
as well as modern, training scholars in the art. Katha is generally

ae : rede = |
SUR ea Tt eet fon fA :

147

delivered in the presence of the Guru Granth Sahib. The kathakar, the
performer, will in fact recite reverentially the hymn he Proposes to
expound from the Holy Book itself. The choice may have been
premeditated or utterly impromptu. To describe the format, which
certainly allows for variations, after a well-punctuated, clean, melodious
and rhythmic recitation of the hymn, its central theme is brought into
focus and explained. Then, the difficult words are explicated and verse-
wise paraphrase of the entire sabda is given. Care is taken to sustain the
context and point out the relevance of each verse to the main argument,
This is followed by a thematic analysis of the hymn, bringing out its
spiritual and doctrinal significance. Notice may also be taken of its literary
graces. To support his interpretation, the kathakar quotes, all from
memory, passages from the religious texts, and anecdotes from the lives
of the Gurus. Before concluding the discourse, the argument is summed
Up and the original text recited again. At katha session in gurdwaras are
also expounded major Sikh historical works such as Sri Gur Pratap Suraj
Granth and Panth Prakash. But this happens generally in the afternoons,
outside the morning and evening services,

Kesadhari

251. KESADHARI, a term defining a Sikh as oné who carries on his head
the. full growth of his kes (hair) which he never trims or cuts for any
reason, Anyone, Sikh or non-Sikh, may keep the hair unshorn, but for the
Sikh kes, unshorn hair, is an article of faith and an inviolable vow. The
Sikh Rahit Maryada published by the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak
Committee, statutory body for the control and management of Sikh
shrines and by extension for laying down rules about Sikh belief and
practice, issued in 1945, after long and minute deliberations among Sikh
scholars and theologians, defines a Sikh thus:-

(a) Every Sikh who has been admitted to the rites of amrit, i.e.
who has been Initiated as a Sikh, must allow his hair to grow to its
full length. This also applies to those born of Sikh families but [who]
have not yet received the rites of amrit of the tenth master, Guru
Gobind Singh.

(b) All codes and manuals defining Sikh conduct are unanimous in
saying that uncut hair is obligatory for every Sikh. One of them,
Bhai Chaupa Singh's, records, "The Guru's Sikh must protect the
hair, comb it morning and evening and wash it with the curd, And
he must not touch it with unclean hands."

= oe ian. |

148

252. Bhai Nand Lal quotes Gury Gobind Singh:

My Sikh shall not use the razor, For him the use of razor or shaving the
chin shall be as sinful as incest. . . For the Khalsa such a symbol is
Prescribed so that a Sikh cannot remain undistinguishable fram among a

guarantee for self-preservation, Even mare importantly, the Prescription
has a Meaning for them far transcending the mundane frame of history.

257. A term which has had parallel usage in the Sikh system js
Sahajdhari, A sahajdhari is not a full Sikh, but one on his way to

149

Sikh worship; only he has not yet adopted the full style of a Singh. Since
he subscribed to no other form of worship or belief than the one
prescribed for Sikhs, a concession was extended to him to call himself a
Sikh—-a sahajdhari Sikh, a gradualist who would gradually tread the path
and eventually become a full-grown Khalsa. One venerable instance from
among the contemporaries of Guru Gobind Singh, who. introduced the
order of the Khalsa, was Bhai Nand Lal, who composed beautiful poetry in
honour of Guru Gobind Singh and who had the privilege even of laying
down a code for the Sikhs.

258, The more recent Gurdwara enactment, passed by Indian Parliament
in 1977, at the instance of Sikhs Providing for the control and
management of the Sikh places of worship in the territory of Delhi, apart
from the Punjab, further tightened the definition of a Sikh and made it
more explicit laying down “untrimmed hair" as an essential condition for
him to be treated as a Sikh under the Act.

Khalsa

259. KHALSA (Ganda Singh), from Arabic khalis (lit. pure, unsullied)
and Perso-Arabic khalisah (lit. pure; office of revenue department; lands
directly under government management), is used collectively for the
community of baptized Sikhs. The term Khalisah was used during the
Muslim rule in India for crownlands administered directly by the king
without the mediation of jagirdars or mansabdars. In the Sikh tradition,
the term appears for the first time in one of the Aukamnamaas (lit. written
order or epistle) of Guru Hargobind (1595-1644) where a sangat of the
eastern region has been described as Gury ka Khalsa (Guru's own or
Guru's special charge). It Has also been employed in the same sense in
one of the letters of Guru Tegh Bahadur (1621-75) addressed to the
Sangat of Patna. The word occurs in Sikh Scripture, the Guru Granth
Sahib, once, but there it carries the sense of the term khaiis, i.e, pure.

260. The term "Khalsa", however, acquired a specific connotation after
Guru Gobind Singh (1666-1708) introduced, on 30 March 1699, the new
form of initiatory rites— khande dj pahul (rites by khanda or double-
edged sword). Sikhs so initiated on that Baisakhi day were collectively
designated as the Khalsa — Khalsa who belonged to Vahiguru, the
Supreme Lord. The phrase Vahiguru ji ka Khalsa became part of the Sikh
salutation: Vahiguru Ji ka Khalsa, Vahiguru Ji ki Fateh (Hail the Khalsa
who belongs to the Lord God! Hail the Lord God to whom belongs the
victory!!) It is significant that shortly before the inauguration of the
Khalsa Guru Gobind Singh had abolished the institution of masands, the

a. Guru Gobind Singh, at the time
of his departure from this mortal world, conferred guruship itself upon the
Khalsa along with the holy Guru Granth Sahib. During the eighteenth
century the volunteer force organized by the Sikhs was known as Dal
Khalsa (lit. the Khalsa army). Even the government of Maharaja Ranjit
Singh (1780-1839) was called Sarkar-i-Khaisa. In Guru Gobind Singh's
Dasam Granth, and in many later religious and historical Sikh texts, such

heroism,

261, The words "Khalsa ji" are also used loosely for addressing an
individual Singh or a group of them, However, it is more appropriate to
use the term for the entire community or a representative gathering of it
Such as "Khalsa Panth" or "Sarbatt Khalsa." The Khalsa in this context
implies the collective, spiritually-directed will of the community guided by
the Guru Granth Sahib.

Krodh

262. KRODH or wrath is an emotion recognized in the Sikh system as a
spring of conation and is as such counted as one of the Five Evils, It
expresses itself in several forms from silent sullenness to hysterical
tantrums and violence. In Sikh Scripture krodh usually appears in
combination with kam—as kam krodh. The coalescence is not simply for

fire. Violence, attachment, covetousness and wrath," Says Guru Nanak
"are like four rivers of fire; those who fall in them burn, and can swim
across, O Nanak, only through God's grace” (GG, 147). Elsewhere he
Says, "Kam and krodh dissolve the body as borax melts gold" (GG, 932),
Guru Arjan, Nanak V, censures krodh in these words: "© krodh, thou
enslavest sinful men and then caperest around them like an ape. In thy

ep Gy

ee ep Ee

we

oa ow wo 8 & ww

we wy

ay dD

eo

td

va Na

eal i

151

company men become base and are punished variously by Death's
messengers. The Merciful God, the Eradicator of the sufferings of the
humble, O Nanak, alone saveth all" (GG, 1358). Guru Ram Das, Nanak
IV, warns. "Do not go near those who are possessed by wrath
uncontrollable’ (GG, 40). Krodh is to be vanquished and eradicated. This
is done through humility and firm faith in the Divine. Guru Arjan's
prescription: "Do not be angry with any one; search your own self and
live in the world with humility. Thus, O Nanak, you may go across (the
ocean of existence) under God's grace" (GG, 259). Shaikh Farid, a
thirteenth-century Muslim saint whose compositions are preserved in the
Sikh Scripture, says in one of his couplets: "O Farid, do good to him who
hath done thee evil and do not nurse anger in thy heart; no disease will
then afflict thy body and all felicities shall be thine” (GG, 1381-82).
Righteous indignation against evil, injusticeand tyranny is, however, not
to be equated with krodh as an undesirable passion. Several hymns in the
Guru Granth Sahib, particularly those by Guru Nanak and Kabir, express
in strong terms their disapproval of the corruption of their day.

Lavan(Anand Karaj

263. LAVAN (Dharam Singh) is the title traditionally given a short four-
stanza composition by Guru Ram Das under raga Suhi (p.773) in the Guru
Granth Sahib. The word /avan, in the Indian tradition, also stands for the
marriage ceremony: in Hindu society the couple reverentially
circumambulates the holy fire to the singing of holy hymns from Hindu
scriptures. Among Sikhs the couple circumambulates the Guru Granth
Sahib, completing a circuiting as each of the quartets of Lavan is being
sung or intoned (see ANAND KARAJ).

264. In the Sikh canonical literature the human soul is likened to a bride
whose marriage (union) with Lord-husband is the ultimate end of human
life. The very first fav (singular of Javan) with which begin the marriage
rites is the Lord's ordinance showing the way for leading a happy wedded
life. The two-fold emphasis here requires man to be ever absorbed in the
Divine Name and to hold fast to his moral and social obligations. This
endeavour for simultaneous perfection in spiritual as well as social
Spheres is required to move successfully towards the goal of mukti, the
ultimate end of human life. —

265. The second quartet (the couple makes the second circumambulation
as the verse is being sung) tells man that his earlier endeavour is
rewarded in the meeting of the True Guru. As a result of this, the human
heart becomes free of all fears and all the filth of selfishness is washed off
152 -

his mind. Ever in the presence of God, .he sings His praises. He realizes
that all beings are, in essence, manifestations of the Divine who pervades
within and without.

266. The third quartet advises man to cultivate in his heart love of the
Lord and detach himself from the mundane world. Company of the good
and the holy is declared to be auspicious. It is in the holy congregation
that glory of the Ineffable lord is sung. And it is to singing of His praise
that man must dedicate himself.

267. The fourth quartet shows the human mind unlocking the Divine
mystery. Man achieves mystical union with the Absolute One. This union
results in indescribable bliss for the jiva-bride and all desires of ‘her’ heart
are fulfilled.

268. The four quartets of the hymn depict the four stages of human
consciousness seeking realization. It begins in man's endeavour
simultaneously to advance on the spiritual and social. planes (1). To
achieve this man is advised to five under the guidance of the Guru. It is
under the Guru's guidance (2) that man will be led to cultivating in his
mind an intense longing for the Lord and.detachment from the world. He
now revels in the company of the good-and the holy (3). As love for the
Divine is awakened in the human heart and man's grip on human values
of life tightens, he gains proximity to the Divine and becomes one with
Him (4). Thus, the religious ceremony of /avan. begins with man's quest
for God-realization and concludes with the attainment of this ideal.

Martyrdom

269. MARTYRDOM or voluntarily laying down of one’s life for one’s faith
or principles, considered a noble death in any society, is especially prized
in Sikhism which has a long-and continuous tradition of such adherence to
religious belief and sacrifice for it. Etymologically, “martyr” is derived
from the Greek martys meaning “witness.” Significantly, the Punjabi word
for martyrdom, shahadat, borrowed from Arabic, also means testimony or
affirmation. Thus, a shahid or martyr is one who by his supreme sacrifice
for his faith bears witness to its truth, and to his own unswerving
allegiance to it. In a world in which bigots and tyrants have often tried to
impose their will on others aiming to deflect them from the path held by
them to be the right one, the situation for the enactment of the high
tragedy of martyrdom has been constantly recurring. Martyrs have ever
since the dawn of history been providing inspiration, sustenance, strength

153

and a self-regenerative force to their respective faiths and sense of
honour and pride to their followers,

270. A martyr is generally defined as one who chooses to suffer death
rather than renounce his or her faith. Physical death according to
Christian thought is not essential to martyrdom. According to Saint
Jerome (AD c. 340-420), “it is not only the shedding of biood that is
accounted as a confession. The Spotless service of a devout mind is itself
a daily martyrdom.” Saint Thomas Aquinas (1225?-74), scholastic
philosopher and theologian, too, considers that on the physical plane
“martyrdom consists in the right endurance of suffering unjustly inflicted,”
271. In Islam ail believers who die fighting against the infidels are
believed to have attained martyrdom. In the Sikh conception of the term,
however, a deliberate choice to suffer death for the sake of religious belief
is crucial to martyrdom, Heroism and martyrdom both involve exemplary
courage, but the courage in a Martyr is more deep-rooted, more mora!
than physical, and is born out of spiritual conviction rather than love of
worldly gain or glory.

272, In the ancient world the records of tyranny and the idealistic
resistance to it have generaliy been incomplete .or mixed up with much
mythological matter. The result of this has been that the clear picture of
the episodes of martyrdom, the relevant factors in the situation, the
ideals cherished and the full emotional significance of the sacrifice have
been brought out only tn historical times when fairly reliable and detailed
accounts of the act have been recorded by sympathetic and imaginative
witnesses, Given such witnesses, what would ordinarily be viewed as
mere incidents of death and brutality take on the character of the
upholding of cherished ideals to death in the eye of a power held to be
divine whose higher purposes are fulfilled through the tragic conflict
represented in the act of self-immolation involved in martyrdom,

273. In the Muslim tradition the parallel term for Martyr is shahid which,
again, signifies witness, Both in classical Greek and Arabic the formulation
of these parallel terms, each of which is built round the same image,
would indicate the history of the moral and Spiritual struggle of races and
tribes sharing common cultural traditions in the lands inhabited by the
races known as the Semitic. While the Greek writers’ mind would be
deeply influenced by the sufferings of the Jewish people at the hands of
Egyptians, Babylonians and such others, and, later, the story of Jesus’
Sacrifice, the Muslims had, besides, their own celebrated martyrs among
the Prophet’s followers and descendants, led by his grandson, Imam

154

Husain. It is from the Muslim tradition that the term shahid came into
India and, like so much else from the Muslim cultural backgrourid, got
acclimatized in the social milieu of the Sikh people in a manner as to
acquire a new and extended significance among them because of the
peculiar turns the history of the Sikh people took since quite an early
period in the growth of their Church. All the classical elements of the
phenomenon of martyrdom have been present in the religious history of
the Sikh people in a remarkable degree. It is doubtful if before the Sikhs’
use of this term in India, any other non-Muslim people had adopted it.
After the currency which this term got at the hands of the Sikhs, it
became common coin in referring to the sacrifices of all those who fell
while serving their faith, or in the patriotic struggle against British rule in
their country.

274. Sikhism began in early sixteenth century as a religious brotherhood
open to all, irrespective of caste, colour or race. The Sikhs did not come
of a single ethnic stock, yet a spirit of sacrifice and readiness to stand up
to tyranny and injustice emerged as their common racial trait. During the
eighteenth century when the ruling powers and foreign invaders launched
a ruthless campaign against them, they matched the situation with
courage and fortitude and with. unparalleled deeds of heroism and
sacrifice. To die for their faith and for their Guru had become their ruling
impulse. As says the Prachin Panth Prakash, “Sikhs had a fondness for
death. To court death they had now found the opportunity. Their lives
they held not dear. They did not feel the pain if their bodies were slashed.

To martyrdom are we wedded. We turn not our backs upon it, sang
the Sikhs.”

275. To quote again the Prachin Panth Prakash, “Once Nadir. asked
Zakariya Khan, ‘Tell me who these raiders are. They who plunder my
highways. I shall reduce their country to ashes.’ The Nawab answered,
‘Their country is nowhere marked. They get their sleep not in villages.
They know not the taste of salt or ghee. We torment them, yet they
flourish. Long summer days they pass without water. In winter they get
no fire to warm themselves. They do not have access to ground corn to
eat, They run to fight. One battles like a hundred. Death they fear not.
Devoutly they cherish to die for their faith. We nave become tired of
killing them, but they are far from finished.” Nadir further queried: ‘Whose
followers are they? Who is their prophet? Or, are they sprung without any
spiritual direction?’ ‘To Guru Nanak they owe their origin,’ said Zakariya
Khan.”

276, Just to prove to the world that the Sikhs had net been annihilated
or vanquished, one Bota Singh stood in the most important highway in
the Punjab, club in hand, levying a tax on all passersby. Finding that
everybody was tamely submitting to this demand, he sent a letter to the
governor of Lahore himself. The latter despatched a body of soldiers to
overpower him. Bota Singh, along with his companion, Garja Singh, fell
fighting valiantly. This happened. in 1739,

277. There were innumerable other instances of such pure and defiant
heroism and martyrdom. Thus does the Prachin Panth Prakash narrate the
story of Bhai Taru Singh: “Once the governor of Lahore asked his men,
‘From where do the Sikhs obtain their nourishment? I have debarred
them from all occupations. They realize no taxes. They do not farm, nor
are they allowed to do business or join public employment. I have
stopped all offerings to their sacred places. No provisions or supplies are
accessible to them. Why do they not die of sheer starvation? My troops
bar their way. They search for them and they kill them where they see
them. I have burnt down entire villages with Sikh populations. I have
destroyed their remotest kin. I have ferreted them out of the hoies and
slaughtered them. The Mughals are hawks; the Sikhs are like quail. Vast
numbers of them have been ensnared and killed., No one can live without
food. I know not how the Sikhs survive without it?”

278. “Harbhagat Niranjania, who was a sworn foe of the Sikhs,
answered, ‘There are Sikhs in this world who would not eat unti} they
have fed their brethren. They may themselves go without clothes and
food, but cannot bear their comrades’ distress. They will pass the cold
season by fireside and send them their own clothes. Some will sweat to

grind corn and have it sent to them. They will do the roughest chores to

earn a small wage for their sake. They migrate to distant places to eke
out money for their brothers in exile.’”

279. “The Nawab shook his head in despair, ‘They are unyielding people
indeed, Their annihilation is beyond our power, God alone will destroy
them.’ Harbhagat Niranjania spoke again, ‘In the village of Puhla, in
Majha, lives one Taru Singh. He tills his land and pays the revenue to the
official. He eats but little and sends what he saves to his brothers in the

jungles. He has his mother and sister who both toil and grind to make a.

living. They eat sparingly and they wear the coarsest homespun.
Whatever they save, they pass on to the Sikhs. Besides the Sikhs, they
own none other, They recite the hymns of their Gurus. Death they do not

156

dread. They visit not the Ganga or the Yamuna. They bathe in the tank
constructed by their own Guru.”

280. An officer was immediately sent with soldiers to apprehend Taru
Singh. Taru Singh was captured and brought to Lahore. He was thrown
into jail where he was given many tortures. But, says the Prachin Panth
Prakash, “as the Turks tormented Taru Singh, ruddier became his cheeks
with joy. As he was starved of food and drink, contentment reigned on his
face. He was happy in the Guru's will,”

281. Eventually, Taru Singh was presented before the Nawab who spoke:
“If you become a Musalman, then alone will 1 remit your life.”

282, “How do I fear for my life? Why must I become a Musalman? Do not
Musalmans die? Why shouid I abandon my faith? May my faith endure
until my last hair—until my last breath,” said Taru Singh. The Nawab tried
to tempt him with offers of lands and wealth. When he found Taru Singh
inflexible, he decided to have nis scalp scraped off his head. The barbers
came with sharp lancets and slowly ripped Bhai Taru Singh’s skull. He
rejoiced that the hair of his head, sacred for a Sikh, was still intact. Bhai
Taru Singh’s martyrdom took place on i July 1745.

283. Facing persecution of the fiercest character, the Sikhs took from the
Muslim tradition the very term shahid to designate such of their brethren
as had earned the honour so to be described. So great was the impact on
the Sikh mind of the mass martyrdom undergone by the noblest and the
best among them that one of their twelve misis or federating clans came
to be known as Misi Shahidan (the Clan of the Martyrs). This mis/ was so
named because of the celebrated leader, Baba Dip Singh Shahid, who fell
a martyr in 1757 defending the holy Harimandar at Amritsar. Since those
times the term shahid has become in a special way a part of the sikh
vocabulary to signify fidelity to one’s faith in a manner in which no other
non-Muslim group in India or elsewhere has adopted it. Prior to this
period in the eighteenth century, the term must already have gained wide
currency among the Sikhs. Since then and after, it has been applied to all
those who wore the crown of martyrdom within the faith, from Guru Arjan
and Guru Tegh Bahadur and those who suffered death along with him to
the hundreds of thousands who in the course. of the eighteenth century
and after met their end while defending the faith.

284, To recall the sacrifices of the martyrs throughout the course of Sikh
history is a part of the Sikh tradition while offering ardas or the daily
supplicatory prayer morning and evening and, as a matter of fact, at all

157

times, Shahids are in this context mentioned along with the faithful
followers (murids) of the holy Gurus. The details of the persecution
suffered by them are recalled on these occasions, such as being sawn
alive, boiled to death, broken on the wheel, having themselves: flayed
alive and suffering such other tortures. The sacrifices of the women who,
under the Mughal governors of Lahore were martyred, who had to grind
loads of corn in captivity and who had their infants killed before their
eyes, are recalled too. Among the supreme martyrs mentioned are Guru
Gobind Singh’s four sons (sahibzade). The phenomenon of martyrdom
and the term shahid are thus an integral part of the Sikh tradition.

285. To mention some post-eighteenth century portions of Sikh history,

the term shahid is applied for example to the Kuka (Namdhari) crusaders’

hanged or blown away from guns at Malerkotla in 1872. It is applied to
those who braved British bullets in the Komagata Maru episode of 1914-
15, while asserting their right to live as equal citizens along with the
whites in the British Empire. Their objectives were, as is well known,
revolutionary. This was the first time that the term shahid was applied to
those engaged in a political struggle. Not long after, all who died while
attempting to free Nankana Sahib, birthplace of Guru Nanak, from the
corrupt hereditary priests in the general struggie for the reformation of
the management of the Sikh shrines were designated as shahids, Since
then the term has been in very wide vogue, and has overstepped its
earlier religious associations to cover all who made the supreme sacrifice
in pursuit of some socially approved ideal.

286. In Sikh Scripture, the Guru Granth Sahib, clearly expressed
injunctions to the true devotee are found not to shrink from making the
supreme sacrifice in a holy cause. Guru Nanak, in the text known as
Alahnia (Dirges) expressing with deep compassion thoughts on death,
makes a transition into moral idealism when he declares: -

Men! revile not Death:

Death is not an evil, should one know how truly to die.
The death of heroic men is holy,

Should they lay down their lives for a righteous cause.

(GG, 579)

158

287. This is truly a call to mankind not to shirk from sacrificing life in
pursuit of a worthy cause. Guru Nanak in another context offers, through
the symbolism of sport, the same exhortation:

Shouldst thou be eager to join the game of love,
Enter my street with thy head placed on thy palm:
Stepping on to this path,

Sacrifice thy head without demur. (GG, 1412)

288. Kabir, whose compositions are preserved in the Guru Granth Sahib,
portrays thus the spirit of heroism:-

The sky-resounding kettle-drum is sounded:

The heart is pierced with the passion for righteousness.
The hero, entering the field,

Fights on without flinching;

Know that man to be a true hero who fights in defence of the
defenceless;

Hacked limb by limb, he still flees not the field. (GG, 1105)

289. Guru Gobind Singh, in a prayer addressed to the Lord, seeks the
boon of laying down life on the fieid of battle, fighting to defend
righteousness: -

Lord! grant me this boon: °
May I never turn my back on the right path;

May I never turn my back in fear when face to face with the
foe;

May I ever direct my mind to chanting Thy praises;
And when the end arrives,

May I fall fighting squarely on the field of battle ( Chandi
Charitra, 231)

Another text glorifying the spirit of martyrdom occurs at the
close of the epic

wer anor

we

159

“Krishnavatar” in the Dasam Granth:

Blessed be he whose tongue lauds God,

and who in his mind contemplates holy war.

This perishable frame shall not last;

Let man through sacrifice sail in the ship of glory
And thereby swim across the ocean of the world.
His body the home of spiritual poise

His mind aglow like a lamp lit;

With the broom of God-realization

Should he sweep away the dust-heap of cowardice.

290. The twin supreme martyrdoms in the Sikh tradition are Guru Arjan’s
(1606) and Guru Tegh Bahadur’s (1675). Few details of Guru Arjan's
sacrifice have been preserved for us, except the general account of the
tortures inflicted on him, such as putting him ina cauldron of boiled water
and pouring parched sand over his body. The brief account in Jahangir's
Tuzak (Memoirs) leaves no doubt as to the torture (yasa) and execution
(siyasat) he underwent. The Guru was offered the choice between
accepting Islam and death. He spurned the alternative of turning a
renegade to his own spiritual convictions, and chose the alternative of a
painful death inflicted in the traditions of the code of Chingez Khan. For a
glimpse of the Guru's spiritual state, besides the account in Sri Gur Pratap
Suraj Granth of Bhai Santokh Singh, we have the noble stanza in Bhai
Gurdas’ Varan. Santokh Singh's account sets down Guru Arjan as listening
to holy music by a minstrel who came seeking him near the place of his
martyrdom at Lahore. Transcending the pain and suffering, the Guru
rendered his life to God in perfect peace of the spirit. The stanza by Bhai
Gurdas opening the line, rahide Guru dariau vichi min kulin hetu nirbani,
is cryptic and symbolic, yet invaluable as depicting the state of Guru
Arjan’s soul. An English rendering is given below:-

As creatures of water are one with the waves of the river,
So was the Guru immersed in the River that is the Lord:
As merges the moth at sight into the flame.

So was the Guru's light merged inte Light Divine.
160

In the extremest hours of suffering nothing entered his mind
except the Divine Lord.

Like the deer who hears no sound but the hunter’s drum,
Like the bee wrapped inside the lotus,

Passed he the night of this life as in a casket of joy;
Never did he forget to utter the Lord’s Word

Even as the Chatrik fails never to utter his cry;

To a man of God joy is the fruit of devotion

And meditation in holy company.

May I be a sacrifice unto the holy Guru Arjan!

(Varan, XXIV. 23)

291. In respect of Guru Tegh Bahadur, the accounts, though still far from
full, are more detailed than about Guru Arjan. Details of Aurangzib’s E
religious policy of the suppression of non-Muslims have come down
through several sources, thus placing Guru Tegh Bahadur’s sacrifice in the |
centre as the defence primarily of the right‘of the Hindu population to the :
practice of their faith. The accounts of the Guru’s. arrest on two different
occasions only confirm the popular view that he was looked upon by the
Mughai court as one whose teaching strengthened among the people the
resolve to face hardships and death rather than renounce their faith under
coercion. Guru Tegh Bahadur thus defended dharma, which is
righteousness, under a regime which had taken to the path of oppression
and tyranny. He stood for those values and decencies which the soul of q
India has evolved and cherished for millennia, and which are some of the a
noblest ideals held by humanity. His sacrifice, therefore, was for a cause 4
than which none could be higher. q

292. Besides the accounts of the Guru's arrests, his journeys in the
Punjab, Haryana and areas to the east, the invaluable testimony of a
Bachitra Natak, the autobiographical fragment by Guru Gobind Singh, is q
there to depict the spirit and essence of this sacrifice. By the side of this 4
scriptural testimony, all speculations of historians and ali research based
on partial and prejudiced sources loses its value. This testimony, eloquent :
though terse, embodies within a few lines a whole heroic epic. It may be q
reproduced here in an English rendering: - 4

The Lord protected the sacred mark on their forehead and 4
the holy thread around the neck.

And in Kali-yuga performed a mighty deed.
161

To defend those who were in the right he spared himself no
sacrifice;

He gave away his head, but uttered not a groan.
In order to uphold the truth he enacted this great deed;
He sacrificed his life, but did not resile from his ideal.

He spurned the exhibition of theatrical acts of miracle-
mongering,

Such as would shame devotees of God.

Breaking the frame of his body on the head of the monarch
of Delhi, he departed for reaim celestial;

None ever performed a noble deed like Tegh Bahadur’s.

At Tegh Bahadur's departure the world was plunged in grief:
The world below wailed,

But the heaven above sang songs of glory.

293. Into the last acts both of Guru Arjan and Guru Tegh Bahadur may
be seen the culmination of lives whose every moment had been a living
martyrdom, to live for God and man, to serve and to spread the light of
truth. To the martyr his sacrifice is an act of God to be accepted in the
spirit of the fullest resignation. Should God design his life for fulfilment in
the way of living out his days in action, he follows that in the spirit of
perfect poise. Should it please Him to send him pain and death, that is no
less willingly accepted. It is by such aptitude that the martyr’s life stirs
great changes in societies and nations. His example becomes the source
of inspiration for others to mould their own lives on a similar model.

294, While the essence of the teaching of Sikhism in relation to life-
experience is transcendence of suffering through perfect resignation, this
spirit is expressed in greater detail with a deeper power to touch the mind
in Guru Arjan’s bani or sacred Word. As one contemplates his teaching,
one feels as though his spirit, in its prophetic moments, felt the suffering
that was, through the inscrutable working of the Divine Law, to be his
portion. And in his sacred Word is an expression of the spirit that lays
pain and suffering aside, and as in the poem of Bhai Gurdas mentioned
earlier, despite suffering “his life was passed as in a casket of joy.” Says
Guru Arjan:-

Under the protection of the Lord not a single breath of hot
air shall touch me;

I am begirt by the miraculous protective Arc of Rama.

162

Suffering fails to penetrate to me- (GG, 819)
Whatsoever be Thy will, Lord, is sweet to me;
All I crave is the wealth of Thy Name. (GG, 394)

295. The same spirit pervades Guru Tegh Bahadur’s teaching. One out of
a number of instances may be given here, of the expression of the spirit
of resignation, spiritual poise and merging of the spirit into the Divine
Reality :-

One who by suffering is unperturbed;
Not swayed by pleasure, attachment or fear,
Holds gold and dust alike;
Is free from gratification at praise or pain at censure;
Is above avarice, attachment and conceit;
Is untouched by pleasure and pain;
Holds praise and dispraise alike;
Has renounced lure of the world and covetousness,
And frees himself from all desire,
Abjures lust and wrath—
In the mind of such a one does the Creator dwell.
By grace of the Lord alone does man learn this way of life.
Saith Nanak: Such a one is merged into the Lord,
As water into water. (GG, 633-34)

296, The martyr must meet his end in perfect poise and in a spirit
shunning all intent to hit back. His utter non-violence arises not from the
helplessness of one subdued by puissant tyranny, but by that spiritual
state wherein all rancour, all bitterness and thought of revenge have been
cast out from the mind. The martyr is in the hands of God alone; from
God comes his trial and to God alone he addresses his thoughts in his last
moments. Without such a stance, his death would fail to attain to the
noble state of martyrdom. Guru Tegh Bahadur’s last thoughts were only
of the great task of guiding humanity along the path of righteousness. To
the continuance of his great mission he addressed his thoughts, like nis
grandfather, Guru Arjan, about three quarters of a century before him.
The martyrdom of each of these two great souls led to far-reaching
historic consequences in transforming the character of the Sikh Church
from mere congregationalism to that of a crusade.

163

Maya

297. MAYA,written and pronounced in Punjabi as maja, As a philosophic
category in the Indian tradition, maya is interpreted variously as a veil or
curtain concealing reality; the phenomenal world as it appears over
against things-in-themselves; the grand illusion or the cosmic principle of
itusion. Maya is assumed to stand between man and reality, producing
error and illusion in the human mind, and creating difficulties in the.
individual’s progress to a state of knowledge and bliss.

298. The Advaitic conception of maya endows it with unique and
matchless powers. It is conceived as parallel to Brahm, for both are
treated as beginningless (anad/) and beyond adequate expression in
human terms. The world of names and forms is a product of maya, which
is indicative of its powers of creating illusion and of concealing reality.
Only for a spiritually advanced individual maya ceases to be, and Brahma
alone remains. Maya continues to exist for the rest of mankind as an
objective entity.

299. Sikhism does not subscribe to this extreme objectification of maya
in the Vedantic theory. The Gurus do not assign'to it the character of a
metaphysical category in the framework of their scriptural compositions.
Of course, the figures of Brahma, Visnu and Siva, as also of maya,
frequently find place in gurbanj (utterance of the Gurus) indicative of a
link with the tradition of Indian thought; but these figures stand only for
the powers of the Divine. Brahma, for instance, is not to be taken in the
literal sense of a creator with absolute authority. Likewise, maya as an
independent creative power would be out of place with the spirit of
gurbani. The only agency that governs the process of nature is nature
itself as a manifestation of hukam, the Divine Ordinance. Guru Nanak
describes such a world as an empty shadow misleading the world (GG,
932), It is an ephemeral world falsely viewed as eternal in itself. It is like
the fire of a single straw, a cloud’s shadow becoming flood water (GG,
717).

300. Emphasis on the ephemerality and non-permanence of the cosmic
order is, however, only one interpretation of the Gurus’ conception of
maya and the world. Maya is that of which the essence is time; it has
come into being at the will of the Divine, and must disappear when He so
ordains. In other words, maya or phenomenal Nature is neither
beginningless nor self-sufficient. It rests in the Creator, whose creation it
is. But at the same time, it Is also the embodied manifestation of the

164

Eternal Spirit. Transient it may be, but it is not unreal. This world is the
abode of God; the True and Eternal one resides in it (GG, 463).

301. In modern times, maya has been interpreted in several ways,
departing from the exclusive meaning assigned to it by the orthodox
Indian view, Viz. grand illusion, giving maya an ontological status while
denying reality to it. Dr. Radhakrishnan ig known to have distinguished
phenomenality and unreality, a view that comes quite close to the Sikh
view. The world is phenomenal but not unreal; it is not real either. In
Radhakrishnan, who seeks to unite Sankara and Ramanuja taking their
positions as complementary, at least six meanings of the term maya,
other than ‘grand illusion’, have been discerned. These are:
inexpressibility of maya, as the relation between the Absolute and the
world, not fully comprehensible to the human mind; creative activity of
God, or his power of self-becoming ( maya-sakti); duality of all things in
the world-process, 4 mixture of spirit and nature, primal matter (prakriti),
that is, the Absolute with maya; concealment: God is enveloped in the
cloak of maya; and lastly, one-sided dependence, that is of the world on
the Absolute.

302. In gurbani, maya is also equated with wealth (material goods) as
also with the sense of attachment to worldly possessions. Most often, the
term denotes delusion, since under the spell of maya, the mind is not able
to distinguish truth from falsehood, the ever-lasting from the ephemeral,
the essence from mere appearance. Ina word, maya in Sikhism connotes
avidya, that is ignorance. This is the subjective dimension of maya, 45
opposed to the Advaitic approach that not only emphasizes the objective
aspect, but leads to an emphatic objectification in its treatment of the
concept. The Sikh system acknowledges the existence of maya, and lays
stress on the lessening of its spell on the human mind, so that with the
liberated psychic faculties, one may attain to the state of spiritual
enlightenment —a state wholly exempt from the trance of maya, 4 state
of being liberated from its web and being one with the Absolute.

Miri-Piri

303. MIRI-PIRI, compound of two words, both of Perso-Arabic origin,
adapted into the Sikh tradition to connote the close relationship within it
between the temporal and the spiritual. The term represents for the Sikhs
a basic principle which has influenced their religious and political thought
and governed their societal structure and behaviour. The word miri,
derived from Persian mir, itself a contraction of the Arabic amir (lit.
commander, governcr, lord, prince), signifies temporal power, and piri,
165

from Persian pir (lit. old man, saint, spiritual guide, head of a religious
order) stands for spiritual authority. The origin of the concept of miri-piri
is usually associated with Guru Hargobind (1595-1644) who, unlike his
five predecessors, adopted a princely style right from the time of his
installation in 1606 as the sixth Guru or prophet-mentor of the Sikhs,
when as part of the investiture he wore on his person two swords, one
representing miri or political command of the community and the other
piri, its spiritual headship. For this reason, he is known as miri piri da
malik, master of piety as well as of power. This correlation between the
spiritual and the mundane had in fact been conceptualized in the
teachings of the founder of the faith, Guru Nanak (1469-1539) himself.
God is posited by Guru Nanak as the Ultimate Reality. He is the creator,
the ultimate ground of all that exists. The man of Guru Nanak being the
creation of God partakes of His Own Light. How does man fulfil himself in
this world—which, again, is posited as a reality? Not by withdrawal or
renunciation, but, as says Guru Nanak in a hymn in the measure Ramkali,
by “battling in the open field with one’s mind perfectly in control and with
one’s heart poised in love all the time” (GG, 931). Participation was made
the rule. Thus worldly structures—the family, the social and economic
systems—were brought within the religious “ domain. Along with the
transcendental vision, concern with existential reality was part of Guru
Nanak’s intuition. His sacred verse reveals an acute awareness of the ills

and errors of contemporary society. Equally telling was his opposition to ~

oppressive State structures. He frankly censured the high-handedness of
the kings and the injustices and inequalities which permeated the system.
The community that grew from Guru Nanak’s message had a distinct
social entity and, under the succeeding Gurus, it became consolidated into
a distinct political entity with features not dissimilar to those of a political
state: for instance, its geographical division into manjis or dioceses each
under a masand or the Guru’s representative, new towns founded and
developed both as religious and commercial centres, and an independent
revenue administration for collection of tithes. The Guru began to be
addressed by the devotees as sachcha patsah (true king). Bards Balvand
and Satta, contemporaries of Guru Arjan (1563-1606), sing in their hymn

preserved in the Guru Granth Sahib the praise of Guru Nanak in kingly .

terminology “He constructed the castle of truth on firm foundation,
established his kingdom and had the (royal) umbrella unfurled over
Lahina’s (Guru Angad’s) head” (GG, 966). The execution in 1606, of Guru
Arjan, Nanak V, under the orders of Emperor Jahangir, marked the
Mughal authority’s response to a growing religious order asserting the
principles of freedom of conscience and human justice. The event fed to

166

Guru Arjan’s young successor Guru Hargobind, Nanak VI, formally to
adopt the emblems of authority. In front of the holy Harimandar he
constructed the Akal Takht, throne (takht) of the Timeless One (aka/).
Here he went through the investiture ceremony for which he put on a
warrior’s accoutrement with two swords symbolizing assumption of the
spiritual office as wel! as the control of secular affairs for the conduct of
which he specifically used this new seat. He also raised an armed force
and asked his followers to bring him presents of horses and weapons.
This was a practical measure undertaken for the defence of the nascent
community's right of freedom of faith and worship against the
discriminatory religious policy of the State. To go by the tradition
preserved in Sikhan di Bhagat Mala ascribed to Bhai Mani Singh and in
Gurbilas Chhevn Patshahi, Guru Arjan himself had encouraged the
military training of his son, Hargobind, and other Sikhs. By founding the
Akal Takht and introducing soldierly style, Guru Hargobind
institutionalized the concept of Miri.and Piri, His successors continued to
function as temporal as well as spiritual heads of the community although
there were no open clashes with the State power as had occurred during
his time. Guru Har Rai, Nanak VII, tried to help the liberal prince Dara
Shukoh against his fanatic younger brother, Aurangzib. To checkmate
Emperor Aurangzib’s policies of religious monolithism, Guru Tegh Bahadur
toured extensively in the countryside exhorting the populace to shed fear
and stand up boldly to face oppression. He himself set an example by
choosing to give away his life to uphold human freedom and dignity.

304, The blending of Miri and Piri was consummated by Guru Gobind
Singh in the creation of the Khalsa Panth, a republican set-up, sovereign
both religiously and politically. Ending personal guruship before he died,
he bestowed the stewardship of the community on the Khalsa functioning
under the guidance of the Divine Word, Guru Granth Sahib, in perpetuity.
The popular slogan, “The Khalsa shall (ultimately) rule and none shall
defy,” is attributed to him, so are the aphorisms, “Without state power
dharma cannot flourish (and) without dharma all (social fabric) gets
crushed and trampled upon;” and “No one gifts away power to another;
whosoever gets it gets it by his own strength.”

305. Combination of Miri and Piri does not envisage a theocratic system
of government. Among the Sikhs, there is no priestly hierarchy.
Secondly, as is evidenced by the Khalsa rule in practice, first briefly under
Banda Singh Bahadur and later under the Sikh misis and Maharaja Ranjit
Singh, the form of government established was religiously neutral.
Religion representing Piri did provide moral guidance to the State
representing Miri, and the State provided protection and support equally
167

to the followers of different faiths. Along with the fiberation of the
individual soul, the Sikh faith seeks the betterment of the human state as
a whole by upholding the values of freedom of belief and freedom from
the oppressive authority, of man over man. Religious faith is the keeper
of human conscience and the moral arbiter for guiding and regulating the
exercise of political authority which must defend and ensure freedom of
thought, expression and worship. This juxtaposition of the moral and
secular obligations of man is the central point of the Sikh doctrine of Miri-
Piri,

Moh

306. MOH from Sanskrit root muh meaning “to become stupefied, to be
bewildered or perplexed, to err, to be mistaken,” stands in ancient texts
for perplexity or confusion as also for the cause of confusion, that is,
avidya or ajnana (ignorance or illusion). In another context, it stands for
“the snare of worldly illusion, infatuation.” Its function is twofold: it
bedims the discernment of truth, prevents the discernment of reality, and
it creates an error of judgement or leads to wrong knowledge (mithya
jnana). Men believe in an eternal reality of their own existence or ego;
they see truth in what is false and seek happiness in what begets
suffering. In Punjabi moh generally means love of and attachment to
worldly things and relations. In Sikh Scripture, the term frequently occurs
coupled with maya (maia) as maya-moh interpreted both as infatuation
for or clinging to the illusory world of the senses and as illusion of worldly
love and attachment. Sikh interpretation of maya, however, differs from
that of classical, advaita philosophy, which considers the phenomenal
world unreal and therefore an illusion caused by human ignorance. In
Sikhism, the visible world is a manifestation of God Himself and is
therefore real; yet it is not satya or true in the sense of being immutable
and eternal. This world of mass, form and movement woven into the
warp and woof of time and space is God’s play created at His pleasure
and is as such reai and sacred: but it represents only one transient aspect
and not the Ultimate Reality. Maya is not an illusion in the sense of a
mirage, a factual ‘nullity; it is a delusion which represents transient as
permanent and a part as the whole. Moh for maya, i.e. for this transient
world of the senses, hinders the soul’s search for its ultimate goal and is,
therefore, one of the Five Evils. It is related, on the one hand, to kam
(desire, love) and fobh (possessiveness, covetousness) and, on the other,
to ahankar (sense of I, my and mine). That is how mof has been referred
to as a net, maiaja! (GG, 266). Guru Nanak advises shedding of moh as it

is the source of all evil and-a cause for repeated births and deaths. (GG,
356).

168

307, The antidote to moh is non-attachment. This is not easy, for the
Gurus preach active participation in life rather than renunciation and
escapism. Ultimately, of course, all depends on nadar or God’s grace.
Says Guru Nanak “nadari kare ta ehu mohu jai—by (His) grace alone will
this moh be cancelled” (GG, 356). The right remedy is the understanding
(gian) that the mundane world, its relations and affairs, demanding one’s
participation and involvement are transient. Non-attachment thus is not
non-action, but an attitude to action characterized by Guru Nanak as that
of a bajigar, participant in a sport. The world, says Guru Nanak in a hymn
in Maru measure, “is like a seasonal pastureland where one passeth but a
few days. . . Like the bajigar one plays one’s part here and departs” (GG,
1023). An image in gurbani describing the ideal life is that of the lotus
which, although living in water, keeps its head above it without allowing
itself to be submerged.

Mukti

308. MUKTI and its synonym mokh (Sanskrit moksa, Pali mo(k)kha) are
derived from the root much (to let go, release) and seem to be identical
in primary meaning with the English words deliverance, liberation,
release, freedom and emancipation.

309, Although sometimes translated as ‘salvation’, mukt/ is different from
the Christian salvation. The latter is a composite concept ambodying
redemption and reconciliation. Redemption is ‘the change in man’s
relation to God by the removal of guilt and sin’ (R. Hazelton, ‘Salvation’ in
a Handbook of Christian Theology edited by M. Halverson and A. Cohen,
London: Collins Fontana Books); guilt and sin, however, are not basic to
the concept of mukti.

310, Mukti has two aspects—a negative and a positive one. On the
negative side, it stands for having got ‘loose from’ or ‘rid of’. That
essentially implies a bonded state from which man must be freed—be it
ignorance (ajnan), nescience (maya), mortality (kal), suffering (dukkha),
passion (kama), desire (trishna), attachment (moha), superstition
(bhrama), physical body (sharira) or the wheel of life and death
(avagavan). All these spell only a perilous existence for man.

311. Mukti, however, is not to be construed as escapism. It is not that
man is removed to a safe quarter in existence where no perils overtake
him. He, rather, discovers within himself an unexpected power to
withstand and not be shaken by any threat or danger. The security and
integrity experienced are spiritual and ultimate; neither ephemeral nor
circumstantial.

169

312. On the positive side, mukti signifies the fullest and truest realization
of the self. The saved life is a fully human-seif; open and unhindered. It
embodies the realization that there is no other than the self. Separation
and ego-consciousness stand decimated. Everlasting peace of the eternal
and infinite self transcend the make-believe worid of weal and woe, good
and evil, gaiety and sorrow, wisdom and folly.

313. The basic concept underlying mukti is that human life is in bondage
on account of its own works (Karma). All the schools of Indian philosophy,
with the lone exception of Carvaka, conceive of an emancipated soul
which, after exhausting the effects of atl karmas, attains the liberated
state. However, what exactly is conceived as bondage, and what as
liberation varies from school to school,

314. The Nyaya- -Vaisesika school views it as freedom from bondage to
the senses and sensuous life of pleasure and pain.

315. The Sankhya view characterizes mukti-as the cessation of the three
types of pain (adhyatmika, adhibhavika, and adhidaivika), The Purusa
(self) is able to attain such a state only by transcending the adjuncts of
Prakrti (material nature). Happiness and misery are the handicraft of the
gunas (qualities). The liberated soul having transcended the gunas goes
beyond pleasure and pain.

316. The yogic school prescribes dhyana (meditation) and samadhi (the
state of pure, contentless consciousness) as means to liberation—the
emptied consciousness shining with its own radiance.

317,.. In Vedanta, mukt/ stands for the removal of duality (dvaita) and the
merger of the self (ivatman) with the Absolute (Brahman). The self then
becomes resplendent as existent, intelligent and blissful (sat, cit, and
ananda).

318. Nirvana is the name for mukti in the Buddhist vocabulary, the two
being considered mutually comparable in the same Thought category
(Majjhimai 304). Nirvana literally means extinction, and implies the
extinction of ‘the five’—viz, rupa (form), sanjna (name), sanskara
(impression), viinana (knowledge) and vedana (pleasure-pain),.

319, According to Bhakti schools, mukti is attained through upasna
(worship) and consists in finding an abode in the spiritual realm of the
upasya (worshipped deity).

oe

170

320. The above bird’s-eye view of mukti as conceived by different
schools of Indian philosophy serves as the essential background for the
Sikh concept. In the first place, the variegated terminology employed by
the various schools—including such terms as moksa, nirvana, aparamgati,
brahmajnana, nirbhau pad,-shunya (Punjabi sunn), nirguna avastha,
etc.—has been indistinctively employed in the Sikh scripture. That
possibly signifies that these various terms, though differing somewhat in
conceptual detail one from the other, are held to be essentially identical
by Sikh thought. Alternately, the Sikh view of mukti is essentially an
eclectic one. That they can lend themselves to an eclectic treatment also
testifies to their conceptual proximity and the Sikh concern with its
catholicity.

321. In the second place, the Sikh thought seems to place accent on the
positive aspect of mukti—thus departing from those schools that lay
primary emphasis on its negative aspects. As an ~xample of the latter,
one may take the concept of moksa in the Bhagvadgita which is described
as emancipation from evil (vii, 20), from karma (iv, 28), from lust and
anger (v, 26), from decay and death (vii, 29), from the body (v, 23),
from the illusion of opposites (XV, 5) and so on. A predominantly negative
view, according to Sikh thought, cannot be the highest objective of life.
Therefore: -

Those who know (jnani) desire not vaikunth (heaven),
They reject even mukti as of little import. (GG, 328)
and again,

- Terave not for a kingdom, nor even for mukti;
What I long for is the lotus feet (of the Lord). (GG, 534)
In these quotations mukti as a negative concept is rejected.

322. The Sikh view holds that God, in His own pleasure, has Himself
created both: the state of bondage (bandhan) and the state of freedom

(mukth).

“The free (mukat) and the bonded (bandh) alike are your
creation” —

(GG, 796).

17]

323. In point of fact, man is born free, but as he grows up, the ways of
the world grow upon him. That is how from his nascent free state (sahay)
he slinks down step by step into the conditioned existence of worldly
pursuit (dhat). In order to re-emerge from it and to re-attain the original
state of sahaj he must pursue the path of fiv (devotion). Mukti, in fact, is
a by-product of the practice of /iv, not its highest. objective which is
nothing short of God-experience itself, and subsequently remaining
immersed in it forever.

324. The path of /iv has its own distinctive discipline which therefore is a
prerequisite for mukti. This discipline includes good actions as the fist
requisite (binu kartuti mukti na paiai—GG, 201), Other requisites are: the
giving up of egoism (mukti duara soi pae je vichon apu gavai, GG, 1276);
associating with God-men (mukti paiai sadh sangati, GG, 675): dwelling
upon the Guru’s word (mukti maha sukh gur sabadu bichari, GG, 942),
and accepting it mentally (mannai pavahi mokhu duar. GG, 3); and ever
remembering the Lord (mukte raman gobindah, GG, 1360). It is
imperative for attaining mukti that one should be ‘dead to oneself’. An
egoist, be he clever or dumb, never can attain m tkti ( hau vichi murakhu
hau vichi siana mokh mukati ki sar na jana, GG, 466). One can attain
freedom by serving him alone who is free himself (mukte seve mukta
hovai, GG, 116). The Guru can remove all fetters and render one free
(bandhan kati mukati guri kina, GG, 804). However, none can attain
mukti without Divine Grace (soi mukti ja kau kirpa hoe, GG,1261),

325. The Sikh concept of mukti is essentially that of jivan mukti, the one
attainable in one’s lifetime itself. Further, Sikhism rejects the idea of
considering renunciation as the vesture of a jivan mukta. Contrast with it,
for example, the Jain view according to which “The liberated persons...
have to lead a mendicant’s life, for, otherwise, they cannot Keep
themselves free from karma” (G. N. Joshi: Atman and Moksa, Gujarat
University, Ahmedabad, 1965, p. 260).

326. Jivan mukti itself brings one to the brink of videha mukti
(incorporeal emancipation) which is freedom not from the present body,
but from any corporeal state hereafter, It spells for the mukta a final
cessation of the weals and woes of the cycle of birth-death -birth (janam-
maran). This ultimate mukti is a continuation of jivan mukti, going on
after the shedding away of the corporeal frame to the final absorption into
the One Absolute—the blending of light with Light (joti jot samana),

172

327. The Sikh mukti is positive concept in two important ways. First it
stands for the realization of the ultimate Reality, 4 real enlightenment
(jnana). The mukta is not just free from this or that, he is the master of
sense and self, fearless (nirbhaf) and devoid of ra~-our (nirvair), upright
yet humble, treating all creatures aS if they were he himself, wanting
nothing, clinging to nothing.

328. He rises from the life of do’s and don'ts to that of perfection—a
state of at-one-ment with the All-self. Secondly, the mukta is not just a
friend for all, he even strives for the freedom as well. He no longer lives
for himself. He lives for others.

Mul Mantra

bed Ll

329, Mul Mantra. This is the title commonly given to the opening lines
of the Guru Granth Sahib, Sikh scripture, or to these lines when they ora
portion of them are repeated at the beginning of each new raga section as
contained in the Holy text. This is the primary or fundamental formula of
the Sikh faith. Transliterated into Roman script it would read: (ik) oankar
satinam karta purakhu nirbhau nirvairu akal murati ajuni saibhan
gurprasadi. The English paraphrase, given the inherent inadequacies of
the genre transiation, would read, “God is one; call Him Eternal truth; He
is the Supreme creator; He knows no fear and is at enmity with none. His
being is Timeless and Formless, He is autogenous, attainable through the
grace of the Guru.” Its placing at the beginning of the Sikh Scripture and
its use, in its entirety or in part, at a number of places in the text,
especially at the opening of new raga sections indicates the importance in
the Sikh tradition of the vision that the Mul Mantra summons. The Mul
Mantra is spoken on all occasions to invoke divine aid, to bless oF to
sanctify. In usage, the Mul Mantra corresponds to the numerous Hindu
formulae such as Gayatri Mantra, Om Shivay Namah, Sri Ganeshaya
Namah, or Namo Bhagvate Vasudevah. Similarly, it corresponds to the
islamic Bismillah-ar-Rahman-ar-Rahim, or the Kalima, La ila, if Allah
Muhammad-ur-Rasul Allah, the Buddhist Om Mani Padme Hum oF
Buddham Sharnam Gachchhami and similar formulas or invocations in
other religious traditions. It is enunciated at the beginning before a new
venture in life is undertaken. It is also repeated to fortify the soul against

despondency or lower tendencies.

330. In the sequence in which these epithets are placed, this unique
piece brings forth the inner dynamics of the Sikh way of life along with its
theology, philosophy, culture, sociology, ethics and aesthetics. It differs
fundamentally from the ‘secret’ mantras of certain other traditions.

pacer ae

ili nat

Unlike the latter it is communicated to any seeker who sincerely wishes to
meditate on it, to live by faith in it. It is used openly and is taught not in a
secret session between the initiator and neophyte but in the presence of
the assembly. Besides the Mul Mantra, there are in the Sikh Scripture
other mantras or (sabdas) to render worship, express faith or invoke
divine blessings, but the repetition of Mul Mantra at numerous places
establishes its fundamental! and supreme importance. It is repeated with
due reverence by a person being admitted to the Khalsa brotherhood and
is thus also a formula of initiation.

331. The term Mul Mantra itself receives early mention in the writings of
Sikhism. A hymn of Guru Nanak in praise of meditation on God, “mul
mantru hari namu rasainu, devotion to God’s Name, the basic creed of all,
is the elixir of immortality” (GG, 1040). The Sikh poet and savant Bhai
Gurdas says: “sati nam karta purakh mul mantra simran parvanai.” (Let
the devotees put faith in Mul-Mantra which enunciates sati nam karta
purakh) and Mantra mul satiguru bachan ik man hoe aradhai koi (Rare is
the devotee who meditates on the Mul Mantra, the holy Guru’s Word).

332. Mul Mantra is, in the first place, the unequivocal and firm assertion
of the vision of eternity and immutability of God’ who is the Creator of the
Universe. The quality of eternity is emphasized by representing God as
timeless, unborn and self-existent, and by dissociating him from fear and
rancour. Emphasis is also placed on devotion and on seeking, in all
humility, the Divine grace without which realization is not possible.

333. Ik Oankar is composed of two parts:.the numeral Ik, or one, stands
for the sole Formless Reality:signifying His existence as well as His
oneness, and Oankar (Omkar) is expressive of Absoluteness of God and is
synonymous with Brahm. The root-word of Omkar is of course Om which
occurs in Indian philosophical literature to express the concept of the
Supreme Being and is held to be the holiest of all. In Sikh sacred writings,
however, om as extended into Omkar (written and pronounced as
‘Oankar’) is adopted. In Guru Nanak’s composition Oankar is said to be
the essence as well as the creator of the three worlds.

334. Satinam: Eternal Truth. It is an amplification of Ik Oankar and is, in
a sense, its tribute. It implies the immutable character of the Absolute
who is beyond categories of the qualitative common names based on His
actions. His real name is Sati which denotes a homogenous indestructible
power, that is truth which was in the beginning, truth which is in the
middle and truth which will be in the end.

174

335, Karta Purakhu: Creator. Guru. Nanak, contrary to the. Advaitic and
Sankhya concept of purusa, affirms his belief in God being the Creator
and His followers full of activity. Purakhu in the Mul Mantra also implies
the pervasive reality, leading to the belief in the immanence of God as
against the transcendentalism of Islam and Advait, Vedanta.

336. Nirbhau: Fearless. Nirvairu: Without enmity. Since Oankar is the
Supreme Being and all else His own creation, He is not under fear of
anyone or anything. Fear always arises from the sense of ‘otherness’ oF
duality. God is free from such maladies. Similarly, He has rancour towards
none, again in contrast to the deities of Puranic and epic Hindu literature.
Since God is the only One Supreme Being, He cannot be inimical towards

anyone.

337, Akal Murat: Timeless and Formless. Though Akal means eternal,
the juxtaposition of these words usually results in their being treated
similarly in translation. Sikhism teaches that God is nirguna, i.e. beyond
qualities: when he is called saguna, it is as ‘word’ that he becomes
manifest, not in a physical form. These two words reiterate God as eternal
by further defining the concept—the eternal transcends strictures of time

and form.

338. Ajuni: unborn. Saibhan: self-existent. Sa/bhan is a popular form of
the Upanisadic svyambhu, implying self-willed existence. Here it seems to
qualify the first term which in turn is a denial of the Hindu concept of
avatar. God is not only unborn, He manifests Himself purely and only as a
result of His own will. This autonomy is a necessary prerequisite of the
concept contained in the next and final part of the mantra. Ajuni and
saibhan are two facets of one vision and imply that the Creator is not
born of any of the known physical processes of procreation, but that His
Being is eternal and inhering in His own volition to be. Ajuni appears to be
analogous to the Qur’anic affirmation in Sur Ik las (La Yalid wa fa yulad—
He neither is born of any, nor is any born of Him). Despite this similarity,
there is a clear distinction with regard to the context and the significance
of these affirmations. Ajuni has the force of repudiating the incarnation
doctrine, personalized as Guru. Grace is the final arbiter. By His favour all
matters come to requiem. Through His grace the individual becomes
worthy of His favour. The Guru shows the way by which God’s approval is

won.

175

339. The Mul Mantra shows the way in which Sikhism relates the
transcendence and immanence. of God. In Sikh teaching with its emphasis
on bhakti, God is seen as immanent in all existence. He is ‘qualified’ with
certain attributes to which the individual human self can offer devotion
and love. In the Mul Mantra it is unmistakably the transcendent aspect
that gets emphasis. God as revealed in. this creed is the indivisible
Absolute, Timeless and Uncreated. This transcendent-immanent aspect of
God, neither element of which can be omitted from the full enunciation of
the Sikh creed, sets it apart from the general trend of belief in Indian
religious devotion; this divine presence does not shed its character of
abstractness, to be realized in the soul and not viewed as an object of
sense-perception, even though it is invested with supreme beauty and
loveliness to inspire and receive devotion. Like Allah in Islam, Ik Oankar
in Sikhism is transcendent yet a presence.

Nam

340. NAM, a collection of sounds possessing the capacity to signify a
person, place, thing or idea, is a key term in Sikh theology, embodying a
concept of central importance, It subsumes within it the revelation of
God’s being, the only fit object of contemplation for the individual, the
standard to which his life must conform, and the essential means of
purification and liberation.

341. Nam translates easily and accurately into the English word ‘Name’,
but this does not provide an actual understanding of its full import as a
conceptual category in Sikhism. Even as commonly understood, a name is
not a mere labei. It expresses something of the nature of whatever it
designates, or at feast points towards that nature. As used in the
compositions of the Gurus, the word nam is a summary expression for the
whole nature of Akal-Purakh (God). Anything which may be affirmed
concerning Akal-Purakh is an aspect of nam. Because He is ali-powerful,
it follows that omnipotence is part of nam. Because He knows all things,
omniscience is similarly a feature of nam. The many and varied qualities
which may be attributed to Akal-Purakh—His timelessness, His
transcendence and immanence, even His manifestation in the form of the
created world of time and space—are all to be regarded as aspects of
nam, And because Akal-Purakh is infinite, so too is His Name.

342. This stress upon nam as an expression of the inherent nature of
Akal-Purakh should not imply that it is essentially passive. In the Sikh
belief, it is crucial that individuals should understand its active role. Nam
is the bringer of liberation. The means to release from the circuit of birth

176

and death are enunciated by the Guru, and the message thus
communicated by him enjoins all people to bring their lives into harmony
with the divine Name. By means of regular devotion, coupled with strict
virtues, each person can develop a pattern of living which accords with
the nature of Akal-Purakh as expressed in his Name. By bringing one’s
being and personality into ever closer conformity with the being of Akal-
Purakh as affirmed by the Name one shall obtain liberation from the cycle
of transmigration. The task is not an easy One, but persistently pursued it
leads to the ultimate harmony. For some people this condition of perfect
peace can be attained while they are yet living this life.

343, The person who wishes to appropriate the benefits conferred by a
discernment of the divine Name must madergo the discipline of nam
simaran, remembrance, 1.€. constant awareness of the Name. The act of
simaran (smarana) Is on the one hand related to the act of surati (sruti),
hearing or listening to the Word (nam, sabda), and on the other to the
function of smriti, le. consciousness which means retention in one’s
awareness of what has been heard, The notion of nam. simaran is thus
‘similar to that of surati-sabda. At one jevel this involves the practice of
nam japana or repeating the Name, a long established convention
whereby merit is acquired by devoutly repeating the sacred word. This
helps the devotee to internalize the meaning of the word he may be
uttering and in this sense the practice is explicitly enjoined in the sikh
faith Further, the discipline must be practised In a corporate sense with
devotees gathering as @ fellowship (satsang) to sing hymns of praise
(kirtan). A third level which is also required of the loyal disciple is
meditation. Akal-Purakh, as expressed in the Name, is to be remembered
not merely in the repeating of auspicious words or the singing of inspired
hymns but also in deep contemplation of the divine mystery of the Name.
All three practices constitute legitimate and necessary forms of nam
simaran; and all serve progressively to reveal the divine Name to the
person who earnestly seeks it. As Guru Ram Das, Nanak IV, says in
Sarang ki Var, “Name incorruptible is beyond our comprehending. At the
same time, it is our constant companion and pervades all creation. The
true Guru discloses it unto us and lets us perceive it in our hearts. Tt is

_ through God’s grace that we meet with such a Guru” (GG, 1242).

According to Guru Arjan, God’s Name is the key to emancipation (mukti)
and the means of attaining it Gugath; God’s Name is the fulfilment
(tripati) and enjoyment (bhugati). He who repeats God's Name suffers no
setback. God’s Name is the devotee’s distinction. Repeating God’s Name
the devotee wins honour (GG, 264-65).

— Te up mg

a a ee a oa

177

344. In Sikhism, nam is an ontological category, a term denoting the
Divine presence, a proper name for the Reality, an epithet of.the Truth
which does not exist apart frem-or in addition to the Truth, but is Truth by
itself. Nam thus means Akal-Purakh, the Creator who is beyond time.
The word is sometimes used in compounds such as sati-nam and hari-
nam, the Name of God. Occasionally, it is also used as a prefix as in nam-
nidhan (the treasure of nam) and nam-ra (sap.or essence of nam). In
Sikh usage, nam is not mere name, but the Ultimate Reality itself. Nam is
that Omnipresent Existence which manifests itself in the form of creation
and is the source and sustenance of ail beings and things (GG, 284). In
other words, nam is the manifest form of the Transcendent Spirit,
unknowable otherwise to the human mind. Nam is the source of creation
and like God fs.all-pervasive. At the same time, nam is coextensive with
creation; there is no space where nam is not—jeta kita teta nau vinu
naval nahi ko thau: all that Thou hast created is Thy Name, i.e.
manifestation; there is no place where Thy Name does not pervade (GG,
4). This manifestation of nam is orderly; its operation conforms to a fixed
plan. From this point of view nam is identifiable with hukam, the divine
Ordinance, and is closely connected with divine will (raza) and divine
Grace (prasad), which are further aspects of the divine Ordinance
(hukam), Nam reflects the immanence of the Transcendent One in

creation, which does not exist apart from His conscious Will,

345. The word nam is normally discussed in association with the terms
shabad (Skt. sabda) and guru, and it is-also closely linked to the word
hukam. In many instances nam and shabad are used interchangeably; in
other cases, however, they can be separated. “From shabad has
originated nam” (GG, 644), which implies that the Truth as mediated by
the Guru is the shabad (Word), whereas Truth as received by the.believer
is nam. The Guru is the ‘voice’ (bans) of Akal-Purakh speaking the ‘Word
(shabad) which communicates the truth of the Name (nam). He who
cognizes shabad shelters nam in-his heart. Bhai Gurdas, in his Varan,
1.37, says that Guru Nanak set in motion the wheel of sati-nam o. ‘the
vision of Holy Reality. Here nam refers to the doctrine-or teaching of Guru
Nanak. This doctrine is traced by Guru Nanak to his preceptor who is none
other than God. “In whose heart is embedded the Name of the Lord is the
true preceptor” (GG, 287). He it is who illumines the mind of the devotee
with the nam. The mysteries -of nam. are: indeed manifold; at several

places in Guru: Granth Sahib it is called nidhan or the treasure-house of

178

346. In Sikhism, the concept of nam represents a whole religious way, a

discipline jeading.to God-realization, But one cannot cognize nam without
divine Grace. Words commonly used in this context are nadar, daya,
prasad, krpa, etc., variously translated as ‘grace’ or ‘mercy’. Deluded by
his haumai (egocentricity), man remains blind to the nam which lies all
around him, and by the act of grace will be put in the path to realizing it.
By. the favour of. Akal-Purakh he meets the holy Guru who makes him
aware of nam. The person who: pursues and glorifies nam and, in
obedience to the Guru, lives a life which conforms to it, will eventually
achieve the blissful serenity of union with the Divine. The actual
obligations of a life of obedience find expression in the regular, disciplined
practice of the various forms of nam-simaran, individually as well as in
sangat, and in acts of approved piety. Faithful cultivation of nam lifts the
disciple. to that sublime condition known as mystic experience by far
transcending the power of expression. It is this experience which frees
him forever from the cycle of transmigration and confers on him the gift
of eternal bliss.

Nam Japana, Kirat Karni, Vand Chhakana

347. NAM JAPANA, KIRAT KARNI, VAND CHHAKANA, i.e. ever to
repeat God’s name, to be ready to engage in the labour of one’s hands
and to be willing to share with others what one has gathered may be said
to be the triple principle underlying Sikh ethics and way of life. This
swiftly: enunciated three-way formula meant conjointly to form a single
‘edict affirms that a Sikh should ideally be a man of a sensitive spiritual
and moral conscience, always ready to put his hand to the wheel and
never shying away from his duty. Actions of a morally oriented individual
are directed not solely towards achieving his own welfare, but towards
ensuring the good of society as a whole. By linking nam japana to the
other two precepts, Sikhism declares that the basis of wholesome living is
God-centredness, compulsions and obligations of physical existence
notwithstanding. At the same time, striving for spiritual well-being of the
self alone with dependence on others for subsistence is not a worthy
ideal, nor is it correct to give free rein to one’s acquisitive nature without
regard to the needs of others. For a Sikh the ideal life is that of a
householder who, with the name and fear of God {and of God alone)
always in his heart, earns his livelihood by honest labour and shares his
victuals with the needy. In Sikhism, the way of the hermit or recluse is
not approved. .
uv eee

179

348. Nam japana or nam simaran, literally means to recite and repeat
the name of God. God’s names are myriad, but the one accepted among
Sikhs is Vahiguru or Vahguru, which is the gurmantra, Guru-given
formuia, they receive at the time of receiving the rites of initiation. In
practice nam japana takes two forms, One is participation in worship in
the sangat, i.e. believers gathered together to express or seek unity with
Ged through singing and hearing His praises. The other way is that of
private meditation, with or without the help of a rosary. The two methods
are not exclusive of each other; they are complementary and a Sikh is
expected to use both. Attendance at sangat is as important as
contemplation in solitude. “Repetition of God’s name erases doubt and
delusion,” says, Guru Arjan (GG, 814), and “expunging grief, pain and
fear, it produces happiness everlasting” (GG, 456). But mechanical
repetition of Name is not enough. One has to realize the Divine as a
reality and be in harmony with Him. As Guru Amar Das, Nanak III, -has
pointed out: “Everyone repeats ‘Ram, Ram’, but merely uttering ‘Ram’
from one’s lips will not suffice; it is only when by the Guru's grace Ram
abides in the heart that one gathers fruit” (GG, 491); and again:
"Everyone has ‘Hari, Hari’ on his lips, but very few have Him in the heart;
they in whose heart the Lord abides, O Nanak, achieve mokh/mukti or
liberation” (GG, 565). Nam simaran, if it is to lead to union with God,
depends on three things. The first is knowledge of the true nature of God
as both nirguna (ineffable, abstract Principle) and saguna (manifest, with
attributes, knowable), This comes through a correct understanding of the
Guru’s word. Knowledge must be accompanied by faith in the
compassionate nature of God and in the guiding ability of the Guru.
Finally, nam simaran itself is a Divine gift depending on nadar or God's
grace. To refer to the Sukhmani, “He on whom God through His favour

bestows understanding, O Nanak, receives (the gift of) Hari-simaran”
(GG, 263).

349. Kirat karni or vo work to gain one’s livelihood, besides signifying
preference for grhastha or normal householder’s life, has a moral value.
Kirat, in Punjabi, is not any work; it means labour of the hands, it means

.ghal or hard, honest work and honest calling. Says Guru Arjan: “Kirat

kKamavan sarab phal raviai hari nirati—remembering God with devotion
and earning one’s living with honest labour is fruitful ever” (GG, 816).
Kirat karni ts necessarily based on dharma or righteousness, and excludes
exploitation of others. Bhai Gurdas (d. 1636) insists on dharam di kirat (
Varan, I, 3: VI, 12; XL, If). Guru Nanak himself condemned exploitation
in very strong terms. He says: “If a garment is stained with blood, it is

180

considered to have been polluted. How can then they who suck the blood
of men be reckoned to have a pure mind?” (GG, 140). At another place
he says: “To appropriate what by right is another’s.is like eating hog for
one (a Muslim) and cow for the other (a Hindu)” (GG, 141). The story in
the Janam Sakhis about how Guru Nanak preferred to eat the coarsest,
put hard-earned, fare in the home of a poor carpenter to rich viands at
the banquet of a wealthy nobleman itself underscores the value of honest
labour. Kirat is central to the Sikh concept of seva oF self-abnegating
deeds of service. In seva no task is considered inferior or degrading; in
fact the humbler the task the more honourable it is for the Sikh engaged
in seva. No calling is considered low or mean in Sikhism, which totally

rejects the caste system.

350. Vand chhakana is perhaps best rendered into English as “sharing
with others what one eats or earns.” Guru Nanak observes, “Do not put
faith in one who styles himself a spiritual teacher but goes about begging.
He alone, O Nanak, knows the way whe lives by the labour of his hands
and shares his earnings with others” (GG. 1245). These principles
constitute the basis of the sikh institutions -of Guru ka Langar (community
kitchen) and dasvandh (tithes), setting apart of the obligatory one-tenth
of one’s earnings for communal purposes. The central concern of the Sikh
as a ‘householder, viz: kirat karni, is ol the one hand associated with and
conditioned by nam japana (says Kabir in one of his verses included in the
Guru Granth Sahib: “Let your body be engaged in work, but your mind
must always be focussed upon God”), on the other, Kirat, sanctified by
nam, must fulfil the mandatory” injunction of vand chhakana ‘to the
exclusion of both exploitation and hoarding. Life regulated by the triple
principle of meditation, work and social responsibility 1s, according to .
Sikhism, the means for an individual to fully realize his potentialities and
to contribute towards the continuation and progress of society.

351. NISHAN SAHIB is the name for the tall Sikh flag which marks all
gurdwaras and other religious premises of the Sikhs. Nishan is a Persian
word with multiple meanings, one of these being a flag or standard.

Sahib, an Arabic word with the applied meaning of lord or master, is here

used as an honorific. Thus Nishan Sahib in the Sikh tradition means the

holy flag or exalted ensign. A synonymous term is Jhanda Sahib (jhanda
also meaning 4 flag or banner). The Sikh pennant, made out of saffron- —

‘coloured, occasionally out of blue-coloured, mainly in the case of Nihangs,
‘cloth is triangular in shape, normally each of the two equal sides being
- double of the shorter one. The pennant ig stitched to the mast sheath at

181

the top which is also of the same cloth. On it is commonly printed or
embroidered the Sikh emblem, comprising a khanda (two-edged sword)
"and chakra (an edged circular weapon, a disc or quoit) and two kirpans
which cross each other at the handles, with the blades flanking the
chakra. Sometimes the flag would have inscribed on it Ik Onkar, term in
the Mul Mantra signifying the Supreme Reality. The flagstaff has a steel
khanda fixed on the top of it. No size is laid down for the Nishan Sahib,
The two flags standing adjacent to each other betwixt the Harimandar and
the Akal Takht at Amritsar are approximately 40 metres high. Nishan
Sahib is hoisted either in the compound of a gurdwara or on the top of
the building itself. Sometimes there are two flags in a gurdwara, one in
the premises and the other atop the edifice. .

352. Outside of gurdwaras, the Nishan Sahib is seen carried at the head
of Sikh processions. In such public marches which generally take place on
religious occasions, five Sikhs, designated as Panj Piare, carry one each of
the five Nishan Sahibs in front of the palanquin in which the holy Guru
Granth Sahib is seated. Sikh public congregations as often as not open
with the flag-hoisting ceremony at which Nishan Sahib is unfurled by an
eminent member of the Panth. Earlier in the time of Guru Gobind Singh
and during the eighteenth century, the Sikh armies, when on the march
or in the battlefield, had the Sikh standard carried in front by nishanchis
(standard-bearers). One of the Sikh misis, which in addition to being a
fighting formation in its own right, perhaps provided nishanchis to other
misis, was for this reason named Nishananvali mis/. In their ardas,
routine supplicatory prayer, Sikhs daily, and in fact every time they pray
individuatly or collectively, recall nishanan dhaman di kamai, the grandeur
of their flags and holy places, and supplicate: chaukian, jhande, bunge
Jugo jug ata! (may our choirs, standards and citade's flourish forever),

353. The origin of the Nishan Sahib is traced to the time of Guru
Hargobind. who hoisted a flag over the Akal Takht (or Akai Bunga) at
Amritsar as it was erected in 1606. The flag the first of its kind in Sikh
tradition was called Akal Dhuja (the immortal flag) or Satguru ka Nishan
(standard of the true Guru). The flag on the top of the Harimandar was
first installed by Sardar Jhanda Singh of the Bhangi clan in 1771. In 1783
Udasi Mahants Santokh Das and Pritam Das brought from Dera Ram Rai
(Dehra Dun) a tall sa/ tree in one piece and using it as the flagpost raised
a Nishan Sahib in front of a bunga (a hospice or resting place) next to the
Akal Takht whence this bunga acquired the name Jhanda Bunga. In 1820
Sardar Desa Singh Majithia whom Maharaja Ranjit Singh had entrusted

182

with the management of Darbar Sahib replaced the wooden flagpost with
a stee! one covered with gilded copper sheets. Later a similar flagpost was
also presented by the Maharaja himself but this was not erected till 1841
when the one installed by the Majithia sardar was damaged in a storm.
Then the damaged flagpost was also got repaired and erected by Desa
Singh’s son Lahina Singh Majithia and two Nishan Sahibs of equal height
have been flying in front of Jhanda Bunga since then. Both these flag
posts were of solid iron. After it had been decided to widen the parikrama
(circumambulatory terrace around the sarover), the two Nishan Sahibs
were pulled out and refixed a few metres away from the former site in
1923. In 1962 the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee replaced
them with new ones of steel pipes similarly sheathed with gilded copper
sheets so that electric cables leading to the lights on top could pass
through them.

Nitnem

354, NITNEM is the name given to the set prayers which every Sikh is
commanded to say daily, alone or in company. These prayers or texts are
five in number—for early morning Guru’ Nanak’s Japu and Guru Gobind
Singh’s Japu and Savaiyye, for the evening at sunset Sodaru Rahras/ and
for night before retiring Kirtan Sohila. The ideal Guru Nanak, founder of
the faith, put forth before his followers was to “rise early in the morning,
remember the True Name and meditate upon His greatness” (GG, 2).
According to Guru Ram Das, Nanak IV, “He who wishes to be called a Sikh
of the True Guru must rise early in the morning and repeat God’s Name.
He should bathe in the pool and dwell upon the Lord through the Guru’s
word” (GG, 305). Recitation by Sikhs of three of the banis in the morning,
evening and late evening must have become established practice before
the time of Guru Arjan who when compiling the (Guru) Granth Sahib in
1604 placed them in that order at the beginning of the Holy Writ. Bhai
Gurdas (d.1636) records in his Varan that, at Kartarpur where Guru
Nanak had settled after his travels, it was a daily practice to recite Japu
early in the morning and Rahrasi and Arati (Soh/la) in the evening, The
compositions of Guru Gobind Singh, last of the Gurus, were added to the
regimen later.

355. The directions regarding nitnem set down in Sikh Rahit Maryada
published by the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee, statutorily
elected representative body of the Sikhs, say: "A Sikh should rise early,
bathe and meditate on the Timeless One repeating the name ‘Vahiguru.’

weet Bae

po MOM ME Bee

ici saa Fe ee MEN Ea

183

He should recite the nitnem which includes the following banis: Japu, Japu
and the ten (prescribed) Savaiyye in the morning, Sodaru Rahrasi in the
evening and Sohila at bedtime,” It further stipuiates that ardas or
supplicatory prayer should necessarily follow the recitation of the banis at
three times during the day.

356. The Japu goes back to the very origin of Sikhism. According to
Miharban Janam Sakhi, its pauris or stanzas composed by Guru Nanak on
different occasions were arranged in a single order by Guru Angad under
the former’s instructions. The Japu is preceded by Mul Mantra and
conciudes with a s/oka, The Mul Mantra is the root doctrinal statement of
Sikh faith comparable to Nicene Creed in Christianity, Kalima-i-Shahadat
in Isfam, the Shema in Judaism or Gayatri Mantra in Hinduism. It is to be
noted, however, that the term Japu, even where it inciudes the section
specifically termed mantra, as such has no magical connotation as in the
case of the Sanskrit mantram. It may have the same effect in evoking the
power of the utterance of basic or primordial sound, but it does not in
itself signify any magical effect. The Mul Mantra in full or in an
abbreviated form is repeated at the beginning of all major banis or
sections of the Guru Granth Sahib. Similarly, the concluding sioka of the
Japu is usually recited to signal the end of a ritual service.

357. Most Sikhs know the Japuji Sahib, as Japu is reverently called, by
heart and recite it as a set morning prayer. The second item .in the
morning prayer is the Japu or Japu Sahib, a composition of the Tenth
Master, Guru Gobind Singh (1666-1708). Different from the Japu in
rhythm and vocabularly, it renders a magnificent paean of adoration to
the Divine. The third morning text is Das (Ten) Savaiyye, culled from a
longer composition by Guru Gobind Singh, Aka/ Ustati (lit. Praise to the
Timeless). Besides these three morning prayers, there can be additions
according to the usage of the place, the occasion and the desire of the
individual or the sangat. For example, the whole of Anandu (Sahib) or the
first five and the final stanza of it may be added; some Sikhs would also
recite Shabad Hazare, while others would recite the Sukhmani Sahib:
Nihangs would include Var Sri Bhagauti Ji Ki, popularly called Chandi di
Var in the morning order. Asa ki Var is usually sung by musicians at
gurdwaras in the morning. Some read it at their homes in addition to the
daily regimen.

184

358. Sodaru Rahras/, the evening prayer comparable to Vespers or
Evensong, is recited soon after sunset. The title Sodaru is taken from the
first word of the first hymn of the text. Rahras/ variously means prayer,
supplication, Usage and greetings. It is also interpreted as an adaptation
of the Persian term rah-/-rast (the right path). The order begins with nine
sabdas which also stand together in the Guru Granth Sahib, immediately
after the Japu, They are followed by three compositions by Guru Gobind
Singh—Benati Chaupai taken from the final tale (404) of Charitropakhyan,
and a savaiyya and a sloka from Rama Avtar and by the first five and the
last stanzas of the Anandu (Sahib), and Mundavani.

359.  Sohila, or Kirtan Sohila as it is generally called, is the late-evening
prayer recited before going to bed. It takes its name from the word Sohila
in the second line of its first hymn, viz. titu ghari gavahu sohila sivarihu
sirjanharo (In that state sing His praises and meditate upon Him). Sohila
is literally a paean or song of praise and Kirtan means devotional singing.
Kirtan Sohila occurs at the beginning of the Guru Granth Sahib,
immediately following Sodaru Rahrasi/, and includes five hymns—three by
Guru Nanak and one each by Guru Ram Das and Guru Arjan. The middie
hymn is connected with Guru Nanak’s visit to the Jagannath temple at
Puri, in Orissa. In the evening, the priests there were performing arati,
the ritual worship by swinging in front of the idol a salver studded with
lighted lamps. Guru Nanak through this hymn explained to them the
futility of the ritual, as already the spheres, the sun, the moon and the
stars are revolving in God’s worship, with fire serving as incense and wind
as a whisk, and so on. The final verse of Kirtan Sohila beginning with
karau benanti sunahu mere mita sant ta/.al k bela—Listen my friend, I
beg you, this life is the occasion to serve the holy ones—is a call to one to
devote oneself to good deeds of service and devotion. The last line of this
hymn fs a supplication to God for fulfilling the only wish of the devotee
which is to be “the dust of the (feet of the) holy ones.” On this note and
on the. assurance that if one devotes one’s life to God and service with
humility one will suffer transmigration no more, ends the Kirtan Sohila.

360. Each service is concluded with ardas, a prayer or petition invariably
used by Sikhs to conclude any devotional meeting or ceremony. When
Nitnem is performed in the presence of Guru Granth Sahib, ardas is
followed by hukam or vak (lit. order or utterance), that is, reading of a
hymn from the Holy Book opened at random, and, if it is in sangat,
Drashad or consecrated food is distributed.

185

Onkar

361. ONKAR generally written down as Oankar in Sikh Scriptural
writings, is derived from the Upanisadic word Oankara (om+kara)
originally signifying pronouncing or rendering into writing the syllable Om.
Known as synonym of Om it has been used in the Vedic literature and, in
Particuiar in its religio-philosophical texts known as the Upanisads, as a
holy vocable of mystical signification and as the most sacred of the names
of Brahman, the Supreme Self or the one entity which fills all space and
time and which is the source of the whole universe including the gods
themselves.

362. The word om, the most hallowed name of Brahman, is derived,
according toe the Gopatha-brahmana, from ap ‘to pervade’ or from av ‘to
protect’, This monosyllable is said to command the highest spiritual
efficacy for the realization of the Supreme Spirit. Considering Brahma (a)
to be inhalation, Visnu (u) to be suspension, Rudra {(m) to be exhalation,
the pranayam is also indicated as obtainable by concentration on Om,

363, The three sounds (AUM) have been described as symbolizing the
material, the subtle and the causal world respectively, This interpretation
envisages the, comprehension of the entities of matter (prakriti), spirit
Giva or atman) and God (Brahma) within the concept of Om or Oankara.
The three sounds have also been identified with three quarters of
Brahman representing, in their respective order, His waking, dreaming
and sleeping states, His fourth quarter, ail pervading Oankar, having been
described as transcending all conventional .dealings and the phenomenal
world (Man. Up., 9.12). Amidst the ksara or perishable objects of the
phenomenal world, He is ekaksara, the Sole. Imperishable One
(Atharvaveda, V. 28. 8; BG V111, 13).

364. According to the Upanisadic seers, the word Om, known as Pranava
also, serves as an aid or a medium to the meditation on, and the
realization of, the Supreme Spirit (P.Up. V. 5; Sv Up, I. 13-14; Katha Up.
1. 2.17). The Mundaka Upanisad (11. 2.3.4) metaphorically describes
Pranava or the Oankara as the great bow which helps the arrow in the
form of soul, sharpened with meditation, reach the target, that is, the
Imperishable Brahman. According to the Svetasvatara Upanisad (I. 13),
the Universal Spirit is realized through Oankara just as the form of fire is
realized through the fuel. Identifying Oankara, the name or the signifier,
with Brahman, the object signified, the seers imply that meditation on
Oankar means meditation on Brahman. The Mandukya Upanisad accepts

186

syllable Om as “all that is past, present or future, and whatever is beyond
the three periods of time is also verily Om.”

365. The pantheistic concept of Brahman as the Supreme Self, one and
impersonal in character, and often identified with Om or Oankara,
continued to hold good along with the growth of the polytheistic concept
of the personal gods like Brahma, Visnu and Siva, the two. concepts acting
and: reacting and complementing each other in the long history of the
religio-philosophical tradition of India.

366. Guru Nanak, in order to emphasize the strict monotheism of the
creed he was preaching and to discountenance any possibility of the kind
of polytheism. prevalent in India reasserting itself, added the numeral 1
(one, pronounced as ek in most Indian languages), the formula for the
Supreme Being thus. emerging from his revelation as Ek Oankar. To this

‘numeral one (ek or ik} a mystical significance attaches in the Sikh creed.

Besides being the opening sentence-phrase of the Mul Mantra, standing at
the head of the Guru Granth Sahib, Ek Oankar emphasizes the Nirguna
(the unattributed) character of Brahman, the Supreme Being: Ek or fk in
this formula is called bij-mantra or the seed formula, out of which has
grown the entire fabric of Sikh creed, which totally discountenances any
polytheistic or even what is known as the henotheistic concept. This Ek is
the very image of the Supreme Being, the Divine Essence (suddha
svarupa), accepted ‘in Guru Granth Sahib. Bhai Gurdas, the great savant.
and poet, thus expresses the relationship of Ek with Oankar: “The creator
first manifested the One; and after, set by its side the ‘ura’ ‘Oankar’.”
(Varan, III. 15). For ‘0’ the original is ura, the first neuter vowel-letter of
the Gurmukhi alphabet, representing according to its diacritical mark *‘O’
or‘U’, mos

367. From the above it will be indicated that the numeral Ek with Oankar
is all-important emphasizing the attributelessness, soleness and
transcendence of Brahman, also known in Sikh theology as Parbrahma
‘transcendent Brahman’. Among the names of the Supreme Being
primarily: belongs Ek Oankar, which is repeated in Mul Mantra by the
initiates to Sikhism, when taking amrit.

368. A distinction exists philosophically between Ek Oankar :and Oankar.
Ek Oankar being: the unattributed, trariscendent aspect of the Supreme
Being, Oankar is the attributed (sagun, sargun) aspect, the Creator, to
whom devotion and worship may be offered. In the Sikh creed the

aed

~~

2 a a i a 2 ed

ey NU

a wey

wy we

ay)

wo § VwY

&

187

Supreme Being is both ‘attributed’ and ‘unattributed’, no distinction being
made between His two aspects—attributed aspect not represented by any
deities or such other beings. The combination in Him of both aspects is
emphasized in Sukhmani (GG, 287, 290). In numerous places in Gurbani
the combination in the Supreme Being of transcendence and immanence,
the unattributed and the creative (attributed) aspect, is emphasized
through various images and similes. Maha Kavi Santokh Singh, in his Tika
Garab Ganjani affirms that Oankar, the creative aspect of the Supreme
Being is Brahma associated with maya. In the hymn Ramkali Dakhni
Oankar, at the very outset, the Creator is saluted as Oankar. Guru Amar
Das in Maru Solahe (18), affirms: “Oankar sabh sristi upai’—Oankar
created the universe. Bhai Gurdas (Varan, XXXVII. 1) represents Oankar
as the Creator. He further endorses that by becoming and uniting Siva
and Sakti, the creation is brought about by Oankar. Ik Oankar is likened
to the sun which shines in sole splendour, while the manifest universe is
likened to the numberless stars. In Varan, 26. 2, the melody of the word
rising from Ek Oankar is said to have created the Oankar (with attributed
form). In Varan, 29.19, Bhai Gurdas recounts three stages of the
Supreme Reality. They are: Nirankar, Ekankar and Oankar. Nirankar
being the Sunn Samadhi (seedless trance) stage, Ekankar and Oankar
may be considered as grosser stages of the Nirankar Brahman, in and
through which He creates the cosmos. This elucidation by Bhai Gurdas is
consistent with Guru Nanak‘s thought in Var Asa where he expounds:
“apinai (Nirankar) apu sajiu (Ekankar) apinai rachio nau (Oankar) dui
gudarati sajiai (creation from Oankar) kari asanu ditho chau (all
pervading Nirankar creative as Oankar).” It may be further noted that all
the three aspects of Aphur Brahman, i.e. Nirankar, Ekankar and O¢ ikar
have been delineated as creators by saying “Oankar sabh sristi upa” (GG,
1061), “Nirankar akaru upaia” (GG, 1065) and “Ekankaru eku pasara ekai
apar apara” (GG, 821). In Varan, 18.12, also Oankar is presented by Bhai
Gurdas as the Creator. To contrast with Oankar, terms Nirankar (the
formless) and Niradhar (the absolute) are used. In Sukhmani (GG, 276,
284), after creation is dissolved, the Supreme Being remains Sole
Absolute (Ekankar, Ik Oankar). Guru Gobind Singh also, in Akal Ustati,
salutes the Absolute by saying: ‘pranvo adi ekankara’ (1 bow to the Primal
Absolute). ,

369. The signification attaching to Ik Oankar must have become clear,
which while using the syllable Oankar from Upanisadic literature has given
to it a meaning and conceptual content different from what it bears in
those texts.
370. This concept of Ik Oankar (the Sole Oankar), also written down as
Ekankar (GG, pp. 153, 276, 608, 736, 838 etc.) represented by the holy
syllables (1) in the Granth Sahib, is the basic tenet of the Sikh religion and
its theology. This symbol precedes the Mul Mantra or the basic formula of
the Sikh theology, prefixed to the Japu and all the musical measures in
the Guru Granth Sahib. The Mul Mantra enunciates in succinct form, the
concept of Ek Oankar, who is the Sole Supreme Self, the Truth Eternal,
the Creator of all and Self-existent. While defining Him, the Mul Mantra,
uses some negative terms also. Thus He is described as Nirbhau—without
fear; Nirvair—without rancour; Akal-Murati—form eternal; Ajuni— not
subject to the cycle of birth and death.

371. This concept of Oankar has been expounded in elaborate and
inspiringly sublime form in the Guru Granth Sahib which time and again
has put a special emphasis, in view of the socially as wel! as the spiritually
disintegrating thought necessitated by the prevailing circumstances, on
the oneness of the Supreme Being. It is only with reference to His infinite
creation or the multiplicity of the beings, bothanimate and inanimate,
created by Him that He has been described as anek (not one, i.é. many)
and saguna in the Guru Granth Sahib; otherwise, primarily, He has been
conceived and described as nirguna. Nirguna Aphur Brahman in Sikhism
being Saphur, without changing His transcendent character and
stimulating His creative divine power, Oankar, which hitherto was latent
and unmanifest, creates the cosmos by assuming the role of the Karta-
Purakh. He:is not that Nirankara becomes sakar in any gross sense; he
rather, in the Guru Granth Sahib, is explained as a creative divine power.
In Indian philosophical and theologica! thought where av is considered as
the root of Om, the emphasis is laid upon its protective aspect, whereas
in Sikh Scripture its creative divine power has been taken into account.

372. Of the other terms considered equal to Oankar or Brahman, the
term sat and its cognates satya and sach being the basic need of a
spiritually as well as socially well-knit society, get a preferential treatment
by the Gurus in the Guru Granth Sahib.

Pahul or Amrit Sanskar

373. PAHUL or amrit sanskar, the name given in the Sikh tradition to
the ceremony of initiation. The word pahul or pahul is a derivative from a
substantive, pahu—meaning an agent which brightens, accelerates or
sharpens the potentialities of a given object. In the history of the Sikh
189

faith, the initiation ceremony has passed through two distinct phases.
From the time of Guru Nanak (1469-1539), the founder, up to 1699,
charanamrit or pagpahul was the custom. Charanamrit. and _pagpahul—
meant initiation by water touched by the Master’s toe—the charan and
pag both being equivalents of the word ‘foot’. In early Sikhism, the
neophytes sipped water poured over the Guru’s toe to be initiated into the
fold. Where the Guru was not present, masands or local sangat leaders
officiated, A reference to initiation by charanamrit occurs in Bhai Gurdas,
Varan, 1.23, born 12 years after the Passing away of Guru Nanak. The
practice continued until 1699 when, at the time of the inauguration. of the
Khalsa, Guru Gobind Singh introduced khande di pahul, I.e. pahul by
khanda, the double-edged steel sword) ‘This was done at Anandpur at the
time of Baisakhi festival on 30 March 1699, in a soul-stirring drama. At
the morning assembly of the Sikhs drawn from all four corners of India,
Guru Gobind Singh, sword in hand, proclaimed, “My sword wants today a
head. Let any one of my Sikhs come forward. Isn‘t there a Sikh of mine
who would be prepare: to sacrifice his life for his Guru?” To five similar
calls successively made, five Sikhs offered their heads one after the other,
They were Daya Singh, Mohkam Singh, Sahib Singh, Dharam Singh and
-Himmat Singh. Guru Gobind Singh proceeded ‘to hold the ceremony of
initiation to mark their rebirth as new men. Filling an iron bowl with clean
water, he kept stirring it with a two-edged sword while reciting over it five
of the sacred texts, banis—Japu, Jap, Savaiyye, Chaupai and ‘Anand
(stanzas 1-5, and 40). The Guru's wife, Mata Jitoji (according to some,
Mata Sahib Devan}, poured into the vessel sugar crystals, mingling
sweetness with the alchemy of iron. The five Sikhs sat on the ground
around the bow! reverently as the holy water was being churned to the
recitation of the sacred verses. With the recitation of the five banis
completed, Khande di pahul or amrit, the Nectar of Immortality, was
ready for administration. Guru Gobind Singh gave the five Sikhs five
palmsful each of it to drink. The disciple sat bir-asan, i.e. in the posture
of a warrior with his left knee raised and the right knee touching the
ground. Every time the Guru poured the nectar into his palms to drink, he
called out aloud, “Bo/ Vahiguru ji ka Khalsa Vahiguru ji ki Fateh (Utter,
Hail the Khalsa who to the Lord belongs; the Lord to whom belongs
victory).” The Sikh repeated the blessed utterance. After the five life-
giving draughts had been thus administered, the Guru sprinkled the holy
liquid into his face gazing intently into his eyes. He then ancinted his hair
with the nectar. In the same manner, Guru Gobind Singh initiated the
other four one by one. At the end, all five of them were given the steel
bow! to quaff from it turn by turn the remaining elixir in token of their

190.

new fraternal comradeship. Then, following the Guru, they repeated
Vahiguru five times as gurmantra and five times recited the Mul Mantra
They were given the common surname of Singh, (meaning lion) and
enjoined to regard themselves as the Khalsa, i.e. the Guru’s own, They
were told that their rebirth into this brotherhood meant the annihilation of
their family ties (ku/ nas), of the occupations which had formerly
determined their place in society (krit nas), of their earlier beliefs and
creeds and of the ritual they observed. Their worship was to be addressed
to none but Akal, the Timeless One. They were ever to keep the five
emblems of the Khalsa—kesa or long hair and beard; kangha, a comb
tucked into the kesa to keep it tidy in contrast to the recluses who kept it
matted in token of their having renounced the world; kara, a steel
bracelet to be worn round the wrist of the right hand; kachchha, short
breeches; and kirpan, a sword. In the rahit or code of conduct
promulgated for the Sikhs on that day were the four prohibitions, i.e. the
cutting or trimming of hair, fornication or adultery, ha/a/ meat or flesh of
animal slaughtered with the Muslim ritual, and tobacco. -

374. The five were designated by Guru Gobind Singh as Panj-Piare, the
five beloved of the Guru. He now besought them to initiate him into their
brotherhood, and asked them to prepare khande di pahul, The Panj Piare
churned the holy water following the Guru’s example and administered to
him the vows they had received from him. Even his name changed to
(Guru) Gobind Singh. Many Sikhs then volunteered to undergo initiation.

375. The five who took the next turn were Ram Singh, Deva Singh, Tahal
Singh, Ishar Singh and Fateh Singh. They were called by the Guru Panj
Mukte, the Five Liberated Ones. According to the Guru kian Sakhian, in
the next row stood Mani Ram, Bachittar Das, Ude Rai, Anik Das, Ajab
Das, Ajaib Chand, Chaupat Rai, Diwan Dharam Chand, Alam Chand
Nachna and Sahib Ram Koer, followed by Rai Chand Multani, Gurbakhsh
Rai, Gurbakhshish Rai, Pandit Kirpa Ram Datt of Mattan, Subeg Chand,
Gurmukh Das,Sanmukh Das, Amrik Chand, Purohit Daya Ram, Barna,
Ghani Das, Lal Chand Peshauria, Rup Chand, Sodhi Dip Chand, Nand
Chand, Nanu Ram of Dilvali, and Hazari, Bhandari and Darbari of Sirhind.

376. Khande di pahul thus supplanted charanamrit. Since then initiation
has been by amrit or holy water prepared in the manner laid down by
Guru Gobind Singh. For the novitiates the same ceremony will be
repeated. Panj Piare chosen at any place for their piety and reputation will
officiate, in the presence of the Guru Granth Sahib attended by a Granthi.

19]

Among the Panj Piare could be women too, as there could be among the
novitiates. No particular age ts Prescribed for initiation. It could take place
any time the novitiate is able to appreciate the significance of the
ceremony and is prepared to abide by the discipline it imposed, A patit,
an apostate or lapsed Sikh guilty of committing a kurahit, i.e. violation of
any of the prohibitions laid down by Guru Gobind Singh, will have to go
through the same ceremony to have himseif reinitiated and readmitted

377. Directions with regard to the conduct of the amrit ceremony as
issued by the Shiromani. Gurdwara - Parbandhak Committee in its
publication Sikh Rahit Maryada are as follows:-

(a) The initiation ceremony may be conducted in any quiet and
convenient place. In addition to the Guru Granth Sahib, presence of

six Sikhs is necessary: one granthi to read from the Guru Granth
Sahib and five to administer the rites ,

(b) Both receiving initiation and those administering it should
bathe and wash their hair prior to the ceremony.

(c) Any Sikh who is mentally and physicaily “whole” (man or
woman) may administer the rites of initiation provided that he
himself had received the rites and ‘continues to wear the five K‘s,
i.e. Sikh symbols each beginning with the Gurmukhi letter “k”,

(d) Any man or woman of whatever nationality, race or social

standing, who is prepared to accept the rules governing the Khalsa
community, is eligible to receive initiation,

{e) No minimum or maximum age limit is stipulated for those
receiving initiation.

(f) Those undergoing initiation should have the five K’s (unshorn
hair, comb, shorts, sword, steel bangle). No jewellery or distinctive

marks associated with other faiths may be worn. The head must be
covered,

(9) Anyone seeking readmission after having resiled from his
Previous pledges may be awarded a@ penalty by the five
administering initiation before being readmitted.

192

(h) During the ceremony, one of the five Piare (“five loved
ones”—representing the first five Sikhs}, stands and explains the
main rules and obligations of the Khalsa Panth. These are to love
and pray to one God, to read, study and live according to the Sikh
teachings, and to help and serve humanity at large. ,

378. Those receiving initiation are then asked if they are willing to abide
by these rules. If they indicate their assent, one of the five says a prayer
for the commencement of the preparation of the Amrit (Nectar) and a
lesson or passage from the Guru Granth Sahib randomly opened is read.

379, Clean water and sugar or other soluble sweet is placed in the bowl
which must be of steel. The five now position themselves around the
bowl in the bir asan position (kneeling on the right knee with the weight
of the body on the right foot, and the left knee raised). Having so
positioned themselves they commence to recite the following:-

The Japji Sahib, Jap Sahib, Ten Svaiyyas (Saravag sudh
vale), Benti Chaupai (from Hamri karo hath dai rachchha to
dusht dokh te leho bachai) and the first five verses and the
last verse of Anandu Sahib.

380. Anyone who is reciting these prayers should place his left hand on
the edge of the bow! and stir the nectar with a short sword held in the
right hand. The others participating in the ceremony should place both
hands on the edge of the bowl and concentrate and meditate on the
nectar.

381. After the completion of these prayers, one of the five says the
ardas, after which the nectar is served. Only those who have sat through
the whole ceremony may be served.

382. The Nectar is received by those being initiated whilst sitting in the
bir asan position (previously described) with the hands cupped, right on
left to receive the nectar.

383. This is received five times in the cupped hands; each time after
receiving the nectar, the person being initiated says “Vahiguru ji ka
khalsa, Sri Vahiguru ji ki Fateh.” This salutation is repeated each time the
nectar is sprinkled on the eyes (5 times) and hair (5 times). The
remainder of the nectar is then shared by those receiving initiation, all
drinking from the same bowl.

193

384. After this, all those taking part in the ceremony recite the Mul
Mantra in unison: -

There is one God; His name is truth,
The all-pervading Creator,
Without fear, without hatred;

Immortal, unborn, self-existent,

you do not know it already and read daily the Japji, Jap, Das Svaiyye,
Sodaru Rehrasi and Sohila, and should hear or read the Guru Granth
Sahib. You must keep the five K’s and are forbidden to:-

(a) Smoke tobacco or take drugs

(b) Eat meat killed by ritual slaughter (i.e. according to Muslim or
Jewish rites) ,

(c) Commit adultery
(d) Cut your hair

386. Anyone who contravenes any of these rules has broken his amrit
vows. He must go through the ceremony afresh after a suitable penance if
the contravention has been deliberate.

387. Members of the Khalsa must be always ready to work for the
community and should donate one tenth of their income for the
furtherance of religious or social work. The newly initiated Sikhs are told
not to associate with:-

(a) the followers of Prithi Chand, Dhir Mall, Ram Rai or other
breakaway groups

194

(b) those who actively oppose Sikhism

(c) those who practise infanticide

(d) those who. take alcohol, tobacco oF drugs

(e) those who wed their children for monetary considerations

(f) those who perform any rite or ceremony not sanctioned in
Sikhism

(g) apostate Sikhs who do not adhere to the five K’s.

388. Ardas is then said and followed by the reading of the hukam.
Finally, any of those present with a name that was not chosen using the
Guru Granth Sahib, are asked to choose a new name in the customary
manner.

389. The ceremony is then concluded with distribution of karah prasad,
which, to emphasize the new brotherhood, is eaten by those newly
initiated from a common plate.

Panj Piare

390. PAN) PIARE, name given to the five Sikhs, Bhai Daya Singh, Bhai
Dharam Singh, Bhai Himmat Singh, Bhai Muhkam Singh and Bhai Sahib
Singh, who were So designated by Guru Gobind Singh at the historic divan
at Anandpur Sahib on 30 March 1699 and who formed the nucleus of the
Khalsa as the first batch to receive at his hands khande di pahui, \.€- rites
of the two-edged sword. ;

390. In Sikh theology, as in the Indian classical tradition generally, panj
or panch, the numeral five, has a special significance. Guru Nanak in
Japu refers to five khands, \.e. stages or steps in spiritual development,
and calis a spiritually awakened person a panch. The ancient Indian socio-
political institution panchayat meant a council of five elders. Something
like an inner council of five existed even in the time of the earlier Gurus:
five Sikhs accompanied Guru Arjan on his last journey to Lahore; the five
were each given 100 armed Sikhs to command by his successor, Guru
Hargobind; Guru Tegh Bahadur, set out on his journey to Delhi to court
execution attended by five Sikhs.

391. Until the Baisakhi of AD 1699, Sikh initiation ceremony, charan
pahul, comprised the administering of charanamrit or charanodak to the
novitiate. As Bhai Gurdas, Varan, 1.23, records, this was the practice Guru
195

Nanak introduced for the Sikhs. At the ceremony the novitiate quaffed
water poured over the foot of the Guru and vowed to follow the religious
and moral injunctions as well as the code of communal conduct laid down.
Later, masands or local leaders, specially authorized by the Gurus, also
administered charan pahul. According to Kesar Singh Chhibbar,
Bansavalinama, a modification was introduced in the time of Guru
Hargobind when water, poured over the toe of the right foot of each of
the five chosen Sikhs assembled in a dharamsal, was received in a bowl
and administered to the seekers after ardas or supplicatory prayer,

392. Guru Gobind Singh, who had abolished .the institution of masands
replaced charan pahul with Khande di pahul. He summoned a special
assembly in the Kesgarh Fort at Anandpur on the Baisakhi day of 1756
Bk/30 March 1699. After the morning devotions and Kirtan, he suddenly
stood up, drawn sword in hand, and, to quote Bhai Santokh Singh, Sri
Gur Pratap Suraj Granth, spoke: “The entire sangat is very dear to me;
but is there a devoted Sikh who will give his head to me here and now? A
need has arisen at this moment which calls for a head.” A hush fell over
the assembly. Daya Ram, a native of Lahore, arose and offered himself.
He walked behind the Guru to a tent near by. Guru Gobind Singh returned
with his sword dripping blood and demanded another head. This time
Dharam Das, a Jat from Hastinapur, emerged from the audience and
followed the Guru. Guru Gobind Singh gave three more calis. Muhkam
Chand, a cloth-printer from Dwaraka, Himmat, a water-bearer fram
Jagannath, and Sahib Chand, a barber from Bidar, stood up one after
another and advanced to offer their heads,

393. Guru Gobind Singh emerged from the tent “hand in hand with the
five,” says Kuir Singh, Gurbilas Patshahi 10. The disciples wore saffron-
coloured raiment topped over with neatly tied turbans of the same colour,
Guru Gobind Singh, similarly dressed, introduced his chosen Sikhs to the
audience as Panj Piare, the five devoted spirits beloved of the Guru. He
then proceeded to perform the ceremony. Filling an iron bow! with clean
water, he kept churning it with a khanda, i.e. double-edged sword, while
reciting over it the sacred verses. Guru Gobind Singh’s wife Mata Jitoji,
brought sugar crystals which were put into the vessel at the Guru's
bidding. Sweetness was thus mingled with the alchemy of iron. Amrit, the
Nectar of Immortality, was now ready and Guru Gobind Singh gave the
five Sikhs each five palmsful of it to drink. At the end, all five of them
quaffed from the steel bowl the remaining elixir binding thernselves in
new fraternal ties. Their rebirth into this brotherhood meant the

196

cancellation of their previous family ties, of the occupations which had
hitherto determined their place in society, of their beliefs and creeds and
of the rituals they had so far observed.

394, The five Sikhs—three of them the so-called: low-castes, a Kstriya
and a Jat—formed the nucleus of the self-abnegating, martial and
casteless fellowship of the Khalsa Guru Gobind Singh had: brought into
being. They were given the surname of Singh, meaning lion, and were
ever to wear the five emblems of the Khalsa—kes or unshorn hair and
beard; kangha, a comb in the kes to keep it tidy as against the recluses
who kept it matted in token of their having renounced the world; kara, a
steel bracelet; kKachchh, short breeches worn by soldiers; and Kirpan, a
sword. They were enjoined to succour the helpless and fight the
oppressor, to have faith in One God.and to consider all human beings
equal, irrespective of caste and creed.

395. The episode of sis-bhet, i.e. offering of the heads was recorded by
Bhai Kuir Singh in his Gurbilas Patshahi 10 (1751) followed by Bhai
Sukkha Singh, Bhai Santokh Singh, and others. Earlier chronicles such as
the Sri Gur Sobha, and the Bansavalinama do not narrate it in such detail.
Ratan Singh Bhangu, Prachin Panth Prakash, simply says that “five Sikhs

_were selected one each from five different castes.” From what is known

about the lives of. those five Sikhs, each of them had received instruction
at the hands of Guru Gobind Singh, was a devoted disciple and had been
in residence at Anandpur long enough to have been affected by its
ambience of faith and sacrifice. It was a coincidence that they belonged to
different castes and to different parts of India.

396. Khande di Pahul, introduced by Guru Gobind Singh on 30 March
1699, became the established form of initiation for Sikhs for all time to
come; so also the institution of the Panj Piare. In fact, Guru Gobind Singh
had himself initiated by the Panj Piare as he had initiated them. Since
then this has been the custom. Panj Piare, any five initiated Sikhs reputed
to. be strictly following the rahit, or Sikh discipline, are chosen to
administer to the novitlates amrit, i.e. Khande di Pahul. Panj Piare are
similarly ‘chosen to perform other important ceremonies such as laying
the cornerstone of a gurdwara building or inaugurating kar-seva, i.e.
cleansing by voluntary labour of a sacred tank, or leading a religious
procession, and to decide issues confronting a local sangat or community
as a whole. At crucial moments of history, Panj Piare have collectively
acted as supreme authority, representing the Guru-Panth. During the

197

battle of Chamkaur, it was the last five surviving Sikhs who, constituting
themselves into the Council of Five, Panj Piare, commanded Guru Gobind
Singh to leave the fortress and save himself to reassemble the Sikhs,
Guru Gobind Singh had abolished the masand system and before he
passed away, he also ended the line of living gurus. In the institution of
Panj Piare, he had created the nucleus of a casteless and democratic
continuing society.

Paap or Papa

397. PAPA. The word stands for one of the basic concepts of the Indian
religious tradition. This concept relates to what is considered religiously
and moraily evil, an act of body, mind, or speech opposed to what is
considered religiously and morally good. In the long religious history of
India the doctrine of Papa was developed and elaborated in great detail
and in many different ways by different systems of faith and morality. No
single definition can adequately express its connotations. For example, in
both Brahmanism and Sikhism it is customary to translate the word papa
as ‘sin’. But ‘evil’ could equally well convey the sense. There are some
other shades of meaning, which, however, have not found a place in the
relevant contexts.

398. Any deed of commission or omission which is opposed to Dharma,
God’s will, religious practice, and moral rules expressed or iaid down in
the sacred texts, may be included within the range of Papa. The word
thus means any act’ irreligious, immoral, bad, wicked, vicious and
depraved. Some of the semantic cognates of Papa are pataka (sin);
apunya (unholy); akushala (bad); ashubha, (inauspicious); kilbisa, kilbikh
(evil); dosha (defilement), duskrta (crime) and apavitra (impure),

399, The etymology of papa is obscure. The word pataka is derived from
the root pat, to fall, physically or in the moral sense. Sin is what causes a
fali from the religious, moral and Spiritual position, the nature of which
may vary from tradition to tradition. Violation of, or Opposition to, a
Prescribed religious or moral law causes not only fall but also bondage.
Therefore, it is said, that which binds or fetters (pasayat/) and causes
downfali (patayati) is called Papa or sin. This seems to be the best
soteriological definition of Papa in the context of India’s religious
experience which has placed supreme value on spiritual retease (moksa),
It is obvious that the idea of Papa is associated on the one hand with the
relation of man with man here and now, and on the other with man’‘s
transcendental quest. All that leads us away from the ultimate Reality
constitutes papa,

198

400. The primitive peopie conceived of sin or evil as a pollution which
was derived from contagion and could be removed by physical means.
The Rgveda and the Atharvaveda reveal traces of this external view of
sin. Consciousness of. morally evil things and of spiritual liberation
emerged towards the middle Vedic epoch, especially from the thought of
ascetic sages known as munis and sramanas. It is likely that the notion of
papa as something morally evil originated among the pre-Vedic non-
Aryan Indians. However, the word Papa and some of its cognates, such as
agha, durita, and duskrita occur in the Rgveda. The usual meaning of
these words during this age was ‘guilt’, ‘evil’, or ‘sin’. The Rgveda also
mentions seven limits by trespassing even one of which a man may come
to suffering. The text does not specify these limits which, however, are
listed in the Nirukta in the following order: theft, violating the bed of the
guru, murder of a brahman, causing abortion, drinking wine, continual
practice of wickedness, and bearing false witness.

401. It is in the ascetic philosophies of liberation, chiefly represented by
Jainism and Buddhism, that we find, for the first time, a clear and detailed
treatment of the doctrine of papa—its sources, nature, consequences and
means of eradication. :

402. To Parshvanatha (circa 750 BC) is attributed the tenet of fourfold

- restraint (chaturyama) against transgressing the precepts of truth,

inoffensiveness, stealing, and attachment to earthly possessions.
Violation of any of these precepts constituted Papa. To this list Mahavira
added incontinence as the fifth sin. The Sutrakrtanga lays down the
general principles for all seekers of liberation to keep their souls away
from evils. The. Avasyakasutra gives a list of eighteen kinds of. sin
including killing, lying, stealing, sex-play, earthly possessions, anger,
pride, illusion, greed, passion, hatred, etc.

403. The standard Buddhist decalogue has the following sinful pathways:
killing living beings, stealing, sexual impurity, lying, slandering, speaking
harshly, chattering frivolously, covetous thought, hostile thoughts, and
false views. Two technical Pali terms, peculiar to Buddhism, are abhithana
(deadly crime) and annantariya-kamma (an action bearing immediate
retribution),

fd eit
al 1s

2 @ @

wus

we

a @) GP

199

404. The Apastamba-Dharmasutra divides sins into two categories: those
that cause loss of caste (pataniya) and those that cause impurity
(asuchikara). In the first Category are included theft of gold, drinking of
wine, incest, etc., while the second category includes cohabitation by an
Aryan woman with a sudra, eating meat of forbidden animal, @.g. a dog.
The Dharmasutras considered voyage by sea as a’sin leading to loss of
caste. In the Bhagavad-gita, Arjuna argues that there is sin in fighting
with friends and evil in destroying one’s family. Krsna in reply introduces
the tenet of the indestructibility of the self and argues that by not

carrying on righteous war Arjuna will lose his own kartavya (duty) and
incur sin.

405. The notion of sin as a moral and religious evil predominates
throughout the Sikh texts. Besides this, Sikhism also developed the
notion of papa from the standpoint of theistic devotionalism.
Forgetfulness of God is the greatest sin in Sikhism: “Those who turn away
from the holy Master are renegades and evil; bound to their desires they
ever suffer and avail not themselves of the chance (to get away from the
path of sin)” (GG, 233). Sikhism does not attach significance to
Brahmanical and other rituals and hence their non-observance does not
constitute sin. Similarly, failure to live up to the norms of varna or asrama
does not form the basis for sinfulness as Sikhism does not believe in
these social distinctions. In other words, emphasis is laid not upon the
sinfulness based on violation of rules of domestic ritual and of

performance of caste duties, but upon the violation of the norms of piety
and moral conduct. ;

406. The Sikh Scripture being a poetic composition, contains devotional
hymns with moral teachings scattered throughout. The concept of sin or
evil is not expressed either in a set text or by a particular word or phrase;
the term papa is employed here because it has high frequency in common

usage, and it is the most comprehensive term to cover various aspects of
the concept of religious and moral evil.

407. Many other terms which could be accepted as synonyms or near-
Synonyms of papa occur in the Guru Granth Sahib. Some of these are;
mail (impurity), avagun (vice), burai (evil) kilbikh (sin), agh (fault),
apavit (unholy), duratu (misdeed), etc.
200

408. Among the sources of sin mentioned are the four rivers of vice and
the three maladies. These four rivers are hans, het, fobh, kop (violence,
attachment, avarice and wrath). The three maladies are adhi, viadhi,
upadhi, which are maladies of mind and body.

409. The Sikh catalogue of vices contains, among others, the following:
lust, anger, avarice, attachment to the world, pride, stealing, tyranny
over others, Injustice, slander, tying, cheating, self-praise, coveting
others’ wealth, and jealousy. A single term which comprehends the sinful
tendency or nature is manmukh. It is opposed to another well-known
term gurmukh, Scholars have usually translated the former as ‘egocentric
and self-willed’ or ‘self-oriented’, and the latter as ‘God-ward turning’.
This is a technical religious term with theological implications and we
must emphasize its value from the soteriological rather than from the
literal standpoint. A manmukh is a sinner not only because he makes his
own laws and follows them wilfully, but chiefly because his will is opposed
to God's will (Aukam) and he disobeys divine commandments taught by
the Guru.

410. Delusion (moha), avarice (lobha) and hatred (dvesha) are the three
roots of evil recognized in the Buddhist tradition. This view is shared by
all the Indian religions. Vaisnavite Vedanta teaches that lust (kama),
anger (krodha), and avarice (/obha) constitute the three-fold gate to hell,
to the ruin of the self. Actions inspired by passion (/esyas) and instincts
(sanjnas) of food, sex-play, fear, and of possession are declared to be the
mainsprings of sins in the Jaina tradition. The Dharmasastras state that a
person incurs sin by neglecting the daily ceremonies of oblation to the fire
(agnihotra), rites of purification, worship, and by doing what is prohibited,
such as drinking wine, and by not restraining the senses. The Kaushitaki-
Brahmanopanisad teaches the doctrine that God makes that man perform
good deeds whom He wishes to raise to higher worids than these, and He
makes that man do bad deeds whom He wishes to drag down, This
doctrine is accepted in the Brahmasutra, and Sankara in his commentary
on this sutra argues that the Lord does so in accordance with the past
deeds of that person. Sikhism traces the origin of everything in the world
to the Creator. The origin of sin thus is a divine mystery.

411. Poison (evil) and amrita (good) were created by God Himself; He
produced these two fruits on the tree of the world (GG, 1172). Illusion
(maya) and attachment were created by God; He Himself produced
delusion (GG, 67).

3
>.

vet

20!

412. In another text are mentioned together God’s law (hukam) and

man’s actions: Man’s activity determines his destiny by operation of the
law.

413. His law He operates, though the Divine Pen writes according to the
deeds of beings (GG, 1241). On the destructive nature of Papa in man's
life, a number of texts from the Guru Granth Sahib may be cited. Some of

and to have “forcibly demanded the hand of the Indian womanhood” (GG,
722). This sin, of course, was rape and rapine by the aggressor. In
relation to Babar’s invasion also, contemplating the degeneration of the
Indian ruling classes, given to accumulating tucre which now the invader
snatched from them, he reflects: “Without sin is iucre not accumulated
and with man it goes not at death” (GG, 417), Reflecting on the nature of
the inevitable retribution for sin, Guru Arjan affirms: “You are engaged in
sin, none shall be your friend (that is, when retribution comes)” (GG,
546). Says Guru Nanak: “Sinners like stones are sunk; by the Master's
teaching will they be saved” (GG, 163), "

excessive grain, have their wings broken and their feet caught in snares,
Their sins bring them to torment.” Says Guru Nanak in Parbhati measure
(GG, 1329): “Whoever keeps in bondage his evil Propensities, to him am 1

@ Sacrifice. One that discriminates not between evil and good, is verily
straying about.”

415. Haumai (egoism), according to Sikh thought, is the reot cause of all
evil impulses. Haumaj is a type of spiritual blindness. Under its influence

one evil to another. The more one gets enchanted by the allurement of
carnal cravings, the thicker becomes the wall of haumai, till the light of

atman is completely shut off and man becomes a plaything for cravings of
the flesh,

202

416. The external view of sin recognized external means of its
destruction. Thus some Vedic texts and most of the dharmasastras and
puranas prescribe rituals of purification and ways of expiation. Offering
oblation, performing sacrifices, bathing at holy places in holy waters,
giving gifts to Brahmans and undergoing physical penances, are some of
the means of destroying sin. Sikhism does not pay so much attention to
this category of expiation (prayaschitta) of sins. Its expiatory emphasis is
on prayer, contemplation (simran, smarana) and doing good to others.
Engagement in beneficent actions, service (seva), is the best means of
escaping sin and expiating for it. In this connection also is mentioned the
triplicate formula of nam, dan, ishnan (contemplation of God, charity to
others and the holy path). These are the cardinal duties and they ward off
sin and its consequences.

417. The Bhagavad-gita strikes a new note in declaring that all sins are
destroyed through loving devotion (bhakti) to God and through His favour
(prasada). In addition to these, this text declares true knowledge (jnana)
as the greatest purifier. Purity of mind and pody, performance of actions
with an attitude of non-attachment to their results are also counted as
ways of going beyond sins and bondage.

418. Great value is attached to Divine favour (prasad, nadar, mihar or
kirpa) in Sikhism. God is the supreme purifier. He purifies even the most
sinful beings through His compassion and grace. God’s favour is
attainable either through undivided love and faith, or through a true
teacher (guru), as Guru Amar Das declares: “Utter the name of God, and
contemplate in your mind, (then you will realize) that the impurity (of
sins) is washed off through His grace” (GG, 230); and again: *Through
the Guru’s grace egoism Is cast out, through his grace impurity (of sin)
will not touch you” (GG, 230).

419. God’s grace however is secured by doing good deeds, by keeping
company with the holy (sadhu-sangat) and by ceaseless devotion to the
Lord. The Guru Granth Sahib repeats several times the statement that
“cyniai dukh pap ka nasu—by listening (to holy teaching) are suffering
and sin destroyed.” The very name of God is auspicious and strikes away
heaps of sin. “Like a tiny spark of fire that burns the entire bundle of
firewood, God’s holy Name purifies the body and destroys defilement in a
moment.” The very sight of the preceptor (Guru) is the door to
deliverance. Defilements are not got rid of without guidance of the
teacher. It is by enshrining the Lotus Feet (of the Lord) in one’s heart that

203

one can wash off the sins of many an existence. Company of the holy
(sat-sangati), rendering service to them (sant-tahal: sadh-seva),
realization of God (brahma-gian), Practice of virtue, service of the teacher
(guru-sevana) and sense-control are also recognized as efficient means of
eradicating sin.

420. According to the Christian doctrine, man suffers from the original
sin of transgression committed by Adam. He can be saved only by
Surrendering himself to Jesus Christ. This idea is foreign to Indian
thought. While the Guru’s grace is essential, man must work out his own
liberation through prayer and good deeds. The idea of an intercessor
commen to the Semitic faiths is foreign to Sikhism, In Sikhism the Guru
inspires devotion, but for release the devotee-seeker (Sikh, Jigiasu) must
depend on his own endeavour, from which there is no escape,

421. According to the teachings of Sikhism, thoughts, words or deeds
based on egoity take one away from God. Haumai is annulled by nam,

nam (Japu, 20).

422. Numerous texts can be cited to show that kam (ust), krodh
(wrath), ahankar (pride), etc, have to be eradicated or subdued before
nam Can abide in one’s heart. Man must shed lust, anger, falsehood,
slander, greed for riches and the go, again, one must get rid of the lust
for woman, and worldly attachment; only then can one attain access to
God even while living in this world of illusions. He must cleanse his mind
of pride, of attachment to wife and children and of desire; only then, saith
Nanak, shall the holy Lord abide in man’s heart, and he Can, through the
Word, get merged in His Name (GG, 141).

Patit

423. PATIT, an adjective formed from patan meaning fall, decline or
degradation, with its roots in Sanskrit Pat which means, variously, “to fall,
sink, descend; to fall in the moral sense; to lose caste, rank or Position,”
usually denot 5 one who is morally fallen, wicked, degraded or outcaste,
It is slightly different from the English word ‘apostate’, which usually
Stands for one who abandons his religion for another— voluntarily or
under compulsion. A patit is one wha commits a religious misdemeanour

or transgression, yet does not forsake his professed faith. He may seek

204

redemption and may be readmitted to the communion after due
penitence.

424, In the sacred literature of the Sikhs as well as of the Hindus, the
word is normally used in the general sense of fallen or sinner as opposed
to pure or virtuous. It often appears in composite terms such as patit-
pavan and patit-udharan (purifier or redeemer of the sinner) used as
attributes of God and Guru. its use as a technical term in Sikh theology
appears to have come into vogue after the creation of the Khalsa and the
appearance of various codes of conduct prescribed for the Sikhs in the
form of rahitnamas during the eighteenth century. Even the rahitnamas
describe transgressor of the code of conduct as tankhahia (one liable to
penalty) and not patit. Bhai Santokh Singh (1787-1843) the poet-
historian appears to be the first to use patit in the sense in which it is now
understood among the Sikhs. In ritu 3, ansu 54 of his magnum Opus, Sri
Gur Pratap Suraj Granth, the poet relates a story, based on an anecdote
from an earlier work, Gur Ratan Mal (Sau Sakhi), of a Sikh lady shaken in
her faith under the influence of a Muslim woman, who is subsequently
reclaimed. She is described as saying: Bakhsh lehu ham tumari sharani;
patitin pavanata bidhi barni (we seek refuge with you [oO Gurus]. Pardon
us and tell us the way t0 purify patits). The Singh Sabha movement of
the last quarter of the nineteenth century had reclamation of the patit
Sikhs as one of its major objectives. Shuddhi Sabha, an offshoot of the
Singh Sabha, established in 1893, had as its sole purpose the
reconversion of apostates, and reclamation of patits. By a patit was
meant a Hindu or Sikh, man or woman, who had abandoned his/her
traditional religious faith under Muslim or Christian influence. Also, an
initiated Sikh who committed a major kurahit oF preach of religious
discipline, became 4 patit, while for minor breaches of the Sikh code, one
only became a tankhahia or one liable to penalty or punishment whose
misdemeanour could be condoned by sangat or holy fellowship after an

apology, repentantly and humbly tendered, and/or a punishment, usually

in the form of tankhah (fine) and/or seva (voluntary service) and extra
recitation daily of one of more routine prayers. Sikh Rahit Maryada
approved by Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee in 1954 after
prolonged deliberations retains the above rules without specifically
defining the term patit. Its legal definition as inserted in the sikh
Gurdwaras Act, 1925, through the amending Act XI of 1944 runs as
below:-

205

“Patit means a person who being a Keshdhari Sikh trims or
shaves his beard or keshas or who after taking amrit commits any
one or more of the four kurahits,”

425. Delhi Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1971, contains a similar definition except
a reference to keshadhari because unlike Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925, it
defines only keshadharis, and not sahajdharis, as Sikhs. It states:-

“Patit” means a Sikh who trims or shaves his beard or hair (keshas)
or who after taking amrit commits any one or more of the four kurahits.

426. According to old rahitnamas, as wel! as the Sikh Rahit Maryada, the
four (major) kurahits are (1) trimming or shaving of hair, (2) eating
kuttha or halal meat, f.e. flesh of bird or animal slaughtered in the
Muslim’s way; (3) sexual contact with a woman or man other than one’s
own wife or husband; and (4) the use of tobacco in any form.

427. Being a patit entails several religious, social and even iegal
disabilities. For example, besides being a religious offence punishable by
sangat, being a patit is a social stigma; a patit cannot have his ardas said
at any of the five takhts; and a patit cannot be elected to the Shiromani
Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee. The Sikh Rahit Maryada advises Sikhs
not to associate generally with patits. Especially, co-dining with a patit
would make a Sikh tankhahia. A patit who fails to appear before the
sangat when summoned, or who refuses to accept its verdict could invite
punishment leading to his excommunication from Sikh society. The power
of excommunication however vests only in the Akal Takh’ at Amritsar, the
highest seat of religious authority, and is exercised in exceptional cases
involving eminent persons and panthic honour. Of course, the sanction
behind such punishments and disabilities is purely religious, moral and
social pressure, except in cases falling under the Sikh Gurdwaras Act.

Punn

428. PUNN a concept in the Indian tradition carrying simultaneously
ethical, spiritual and philosophical connotations. As an ethical concept it
implies voluntary obedience to the moral rules of conduct which have the
sanction of a system of reward and punishment. As spiritual attitude, it is
the inclination of the self towards a virtuous and ascetic living. As a
metaphysical concept, it implies purity, holiness and goodness. Conceived
as a value, punn is the subtle result of righteous actions which influence
not only the doer’s present life, but also his eschatological state.

206

429. The word punn (Prakrit punna, Pali punna, Sanskrit punya) is
derived from the root pu, meaning ‘to purify’ or ‘to make clear’. Punn is
that action which purifies the self (atman) or the stream of life. The
consequence of a pure action is pleasant and purifying not only for the
doer but also for others. Any action which brings about desirable results,
such as peace, prosperity, and happiness, that which is good in the
beginning, good in the middle and good in the end is indeed punn. In the
sacred literature and lexicons of India we find this word used as a
synonym of guna, subha, kusala, sukrta, dharma, pavana and sreyas.
Translated into English these words mean ‘virtue’, ‘auspicious’, ‘good’,
‘noble deed’, ‘righteousness’, ‘pure’ and ‘preferable’. The term punn will
perhaps best translate as right-doing—a meritorious action.

430. The word punya occurs in the Rgveda, though not in its later
religious sense. The Atharvaveda mentions ‘pure worlds’ (punyansca
lokan) while the Satapatha Brahmana refers to ‘religious works’ (punya-
karma) such as horse-sacrifice performed by the Pariksitas. The
Chandogya Upanisad attributes birth in higher state as the human to good
conduct (ramaniyacharanah) and birth as a‘boar or a candala to bad
conduct (kapuyacharanah). The Brhadaranyakopanisad states that a
person becomes pious (punya) by pious deeds (punyena karmana). The
early Upanisads also mention austerity (tapas) as a virtue. Study of the
Vedas, sacrifice, almsgiving, and fasting are meritorious, but they are
inferior to the knowledge of the Absolute (Brahman).

431. Itis in the early Buddhist sources that the doctrine of merit is set
down for the first time as an essential element in religious culture. Here a
clear distinction is made between virtues or good qualities and their
merit. Thus it is stated in the Dighanikaya that “merit (punya) grows by
the cultivation of good qualities (kusala dharma).” The “foundations of
meritorious deeds” (punya-kriya-vastu) are discussed minutely in the
Buddhist texts. The three virtuous practices that contribute to merit are
liberality (dana), good conduct (sila) and meditation (dhyana). Merit is
often represented as the foundation and condition of birth in good states
(sugati) and in heaven (svarga). Liberality, self-denial, self-restraint,
truthful speech, austerity, continence, study of the doctrine, renunciation,
friendliness, loving kindness, impartiality, serene joy, knowledge, right
views, pure intention, forbearance and meditational achievements are
some of the qualities contributing to merit. The Buddha is honoured as
the embodiment of the supreme perfection of all meritorious virtues.
Those bereft of merit are compared to the wood in the cremation ground.

Se ee OLE eer

@ &

ue Oo wo Oo &

wy

re

207

Absence of greed, of delusion, and of hatred is auspicious (subha) and
leads to good states (sugati) and happiness (sukha), Punya is often
compared to nectar, the antidote to living in hell and death. Human
beings are purified not by birth or wealth, but by good deeds, knowledge,
righteousness, and moral conduct. Sila or Pure conduct is the basis of the
entire religious life. The Emperor Asoka taught that one can obtain infinite
merit (anantam Punyam) by the gift of righteousness (dhammadana).

432. The Jaina attitude towards merit (punya) deserves Special notice,
Human beings have three dispositions (bhava): good (subha), bad

(punya), the second of sinfulness (apunya) and the third of liberation
(nivrtti). The Sage (yogin), leaving both good and bad, establishes himself
in the pure disposition. In the Jaina theory karma, whether meritorious
OF unmeritorious, results in bondage, For those who desire ultimate

433. Moksa being too high an ideal for the commonality of people,- birth
in good states of existence (yoni), whether in the divine or the human
world (/oka), is the generally cherished ideal. Merit (punya) is the sure

founded on the ‘right view’ (samyagarsti) and the other founded on the
‘false view’ (mithyadrsti); the former leads to liberation.

434. The Mahabharata, the Smrtis and the Puranas describe ip detail the
means of producing merits and the rewards they lead to. Going on
pilgrimage to holy places (tirthas), bathing in sacred rivers (snana) and
keeping various vows (vratas) and fasts (upavasas) are not the only ways
of earning merit, Great emphasis is laid on the cultivation of moral
qualities, According to these texts one obtains the full reward of
pilgrimage and holy bath only when one is Compassionate towards all
beings and is pure and keeps one’s senses under control. Truthfulness,
austerity, charity, celibacy, contentment, forbearance, Sweet speech, and
straightforwardness are the real tirthas that purify a being and beget

208

merit. The Bhagavadgita lays down that one should perform one’s
assigned duty (sva-dharma) in order to obtain excellent rewards. Among
other things, death in battle is declared to be meritorious and resulting in
birth in. the heaven. An enlightened sage, sthitaprajna, however, is
described as being untouched by good (subha) and evil (asubha) things.

435. The belief that merits travel with the self wherever reborn is
common to all the religions of Indian origin. Spiritual merit is the only
companion of.a being.in the next world (paraloka). Therefore, one should
accumulate spiritual merits.

436. It will be incorrect to assume, however, that merits are
accumulated only. for the enjoyment of rewards in a future life. Some
people may earn merits by doing good works with a view to gaining a
good reputation and glory in this very life. Some people may perform
meritorious deeds for destroying their sins, while a few might be inspired
to pursue merits out of love and reverence for piety or with a view to
growing .in holiness. An important reason behind the accumulation of
merits may be the desire to get and possess enormous supernatural
powers. This is especially true of numerous figures of India’s iegendary
and mythical past. The name of such, as a king like Harischandra, a
brahmana seer like Visvamitra, or an ascetic sage like Kapilamuni,
represent a whole series of beings, either mythical, semi-historical or
wholly imaginary, whose supernatural exploits occupy hundreds of pages
of the Mahabharata and the Puranas. L<e the practice of yoga, merits
were. stored for secular purposes also—victory in war, immunity from
disease or curse, control over the forces of nature, such as rain and
storm, and so on.

437. Certain faiths have paid little heed to this doctrine of merits.
Among them may be counted the Bhaktimarga of India anu the Sufism of
Persia. . Although faith and fove are the dominant notes of the sects of
Bhakti tradition of India, it will be wrong to say that they overlooked
virtues like ethical excellence, compassion, and liberality. In the teachings
of Kabir and Tulsidasa, who are among the greatest name in the Bhakti
tradition, the value of good works, of altruistic ethics, has never been lost
sight of.

438. How shall we define punn in Sikhism of which bhakti or devotion
constitutes such an important factor? All those deeds of body, mind and
speech which conduce to constant mindfulness of the Divine Reality are

268 6G

© &

ew w |

‘ep

ait

209

meritorious from the standpoint of Sikhism. The ideal person, in Sikh
vocabulary, gurmukh, is the embodiment of moral and spiritual virtues.
He lives, moves and has his being in the Timeless Being. In verse after

verse in the Guru Granth Sahib he is eulogized for this moral excellence
and blameless behaviour towards his fellow beings.

433. The God-inspired person (gurmukh) is not only a devotee or ‘a
sharer in Divine Glory’ (bhagat). As stated in the Siddha-Gosti (stanzas
35-42), the gurmukh is engaged in meditation, in dispensing charities ang
purifying himself with the holy bath. He is enlightened and endeavours,
like Ramachandra, in the way of God fighting against evil forces. He has
the true discrimination and his transmigration is annulled. In devotion to
the holy Lord, his egoism is consumed; by such devotion he is exalted.
The Guru Granth Sahib refers to meritorious work as punn, sukrt, gun,
bhali-kar and nam-simran (‘merit’, ‘pious action’, ‘virtue’, ‘good deed’,
and ‘the mindfulness of God’) in different contexts, The message of the
Teachers of the Sikh tradition is that faith in and love of the one Divine

Reality must go along with morally good works of the body, mind and
speech. “Without doing good no bhakti can be” (Gapu, 21).

440. The foremost work of merit (punn) is, of course, constant

awareness of God. This is the root of all the other merits; without this
other good works are of little avail. °

441. A person gets little honour through pilgrimage, austerity, mercy and

liberal gifts; it is the hearing, accepting and meditating (on the Divine
Essence) which is the real bathing in the innermost sanctum.

Holy bathing, austerities, compassion, charity—are all
approved if these bring even a grain of true merit.

True merit lies in absorbing holy teaching, faith and
devotion—

That will be the holy purifying bath of the Soul.
And without devotion to God,
No liberation can be (GG, 260).

442. The fact is that the gurmukh or God-inspired person is described as
‘undefiled’ (nirmalu), ‘pure’ (sucha), ‘self-controlled’ (sanjam/), ‘self-
investigator’ (parakhu), ‘contented’ (santokhi), possessed of the
knowledge of sacred texts (sastar-simiriti-ved), one who has forsaken
210

hatred (vair) and opposition (virodh), one who has eradicated all
reckoning of complaint, hostility, and revenge (sagali ganat mitaval)
against others, and as one who is rejoicing in the fervour of Divine Name
(ramnam rangi rata).

443. The doctrine of grace has a place of special significance in Sikh
thought. The compassionate attitude or favourable disposition of God
(nadar, kirpa, prasad, mihar) is essential even for doing meritorious
works, Or for avoiding evil:

Through the Guru's grace alone may one become pure and
clean (GG, 158).

Virtuous conduct and even devotion to God is obtained
through His favour:

Whosoever He elects to his favour becomes exalted. Through
the Guru’s grace God’s Name abides in his heart (GG, 159).

444. One of the highest virtues, according to Guru Nanak, is to have
complete control over one’s mana (mind)}—“one who has conquered his
mind, has conquered the world” (GG, 6). The sum total of such scriptural
affirmations is that it is through God's favour or direction that one
becomes virtuous, that merit is accumulated through Divine grace.
However this does not mean that in Sikhism there is no room for the
exercise of free will in the practice of virtuous life.

445. It has, rather, been repeatedly emphasized in gurbani that human
life is the chance provided to man for acquiring that which is the sole aim
of all creatures, that is, communion with the Creator.

446. This emphasis on Divine favour (nadar, prasad), however, does not
amount to predestinarianism and fatalism. In the Sikh Scripture the
emphasis on ethical and moral teachings is very pronounced, making it
clear beyond doubt that every individual is responsible for his actions,
good or bad; and that he will get the reward accordingly: -

Deeds good and bad will be weighed in the presence of
the Law-maker; some will be judged to be close, others far
apart. According to their actions will they be assigned their
ranks (GG, 8).

448. The crucial question is raised in the Scripture: “In the face of both
sin and virtue as our witnesses, what Prayer can avail us” (GG, 351)?
Prayer bears fruit only when it is accompanied by good life. “Doing good
deeds (sukrt) and remembering God one will not step out in the direction
of hell” (GG, 461). It is the meekest and the humblest, those who rejoice
in the dust of the feet of the sages Gan-dhuri), that obtain the Supreme
state (paramgati),

449. We read in the Guru Granth Sahib: “Salute, with joined palms, that
brings great merit; prostrate before them, and you will thereby
accumulate much merit” (GG, 13),

450, The Sikh list of merits includes virtues such as mindfulness of God,
spirit of detachment (Sairagu), truthfulness, contentment, doing good
deeds, restraint of the senses, righteous conduct, Patience, faith,
compassion, humility, fear of sin, chastity, scriptural study, liberality,
knowledge, understanding, and desire for ultimate release (mokhu), etc.

Practise numerous austerities, but if he falls a prey to conceit, he will
continue in the circle of rebirth in a good or bad state” (GG, 278),
Haumaj (egoity), thus, annihilates all Punn or merit, and according to
Sikhism, one cannot be virtuous unless one discards one’s haurnai,

Rahit Maryada

452. RAHIT MARYADA, traditions and rules which govern the distinctive
Sikh way of life and determine Sikh belief and practice. Rahit, from the
Punjabi verb rahina (to live to remain), means mode of living while
Matyada is a Sanskrit word composed of Marya (limit, boundary, mark)
and ada (to give to oneself, to accept, to undertake), meaning bounds or
limits of morality and Propriety, rule or custom. Guru Nanak, who founded
the Sikh faith, and his nine successors who nurtured the community
during the first two centuries of its existence, not only set for their

212

followers a strict moral standard, but also a distinctive pattern of personal
appearance and social behaviour. The tenets of Sikh faith and rules of
conduct are not-set in any formal treatise, but are scattered in their
Scripture and other religious texts and in their historical records.
Attempting systematic statements of rules several rahitnamas or codes of
conduct appeared during the eighteenth century after the promulgation
by Guru Gobind Singh of Khalsa rahit or discipline. Another similar and
more detailed work of the same period is the anonymous Prem Sumarag.
Some general rules regarding Sikh rahit are also contained in various
hukamnamas (decrees or rules in the form of letters) of the Gurus.
Important features of Sikh rahit maryada may be summed up under the

titles: physical appearance; religious beliefs and observances; moral
conduct; and social behaviour.

453. The first mark of religious investiture of a Sikh personality is kes,
i.e. unshorn hair of the head covered with a turban, and an untrimmed
beard. Kes is one of the five symbols which every regular, initiated Sikh
must adopt, the other four being kangha (comb in the hair), kara (steel
bangle), kachchh (shorts) and Kirpan (sword), collectively known as the
five K’s, each beginning with the letter “K”. These were the physical
features of the rahit prescribed for Sikhs’by Guru Gobind Singh when he
administered the rites of initiation to the first Five admitted to the Khalsa
brotherhood on the Baisakhi day (March 30) of AD 1699. They were signs
of the bond that linked the Sikh community together and gave it its
distinctive identity. They were a declaration of privilege as also of the
intent to be prepared steadfastly to uphold the ideals the Guru had
demarcated. .

454, Belief in One Infinite Timeless and Formless Creator God is
fundamental to a Sikh's religious creed. His worship is addressed to Him
to the exclusion of any incarnations of the divine, the gods and
goddesses, idols and images. His devotional practice consists in rising
early and reciting his morning prayers after bathing, joining the sangat or
holy fellowship in gurdwara, listening to the Guru’s word, and meditating

upon God’s Name. Guru for the Sikh is Guru Nanak and his nine spiritual |
successors and, then, the Guru Granth Sahib, the Holy Book ordained

Guru. by Guru Gobind Singh, Nanak X. A Sikh believes in the oneness of
the Ten Gurus—all of one light, all one in spirit though different in body.

He bows in all circumstances to God’s Will (hukam) and has faith in His

compassion (daya) and grace (nadar). He treats his birth as a hukam,

being a gift from God and a rare opportunity for his moral and spiritual

evolution. Active participation in life as a householder is, therefore,

213

preferred to asceticism. Yet one must live in the world like the lotus which
emerges from the mud pure and spotless. Rahitnamas as well as the
religious texts adjure one specifically to be truthful, honest and humble
and not to steal, gamble cheat or slander. Special emphasis is laid on
virtuous sexual behaviour. A Sikh male is to treat all women other than
his spouse as mothers, sisters and daughters. A Sikh female is similarly
required to be chaste and morally blameless. Sikhs do not smoke and are
not to consume drugs and intoxicants.

455. A Sikh regards al! human beings as equal. The Gurus enjoined him
to recognize ali mankind as one. They rejected the caste system. “False,”
said Guru Nanak, “is caste, and false the titled fame. One Supreme Lord
sustaineth all” (GG, 83). The Sikh institutions of sangat (fellowship) and
pangat (commensality) invalidate distinctions based on birth or social
position. Women among the Sikhs enjoy equal status with men. The
Gurus disapproved of the practice of sati (burning of the widow on the
funeral pyre of her husband’s body prevalent among the Hindus). The
rahitnamas expressly lay down injunctions against those who practise
female infanticide. A practical and positive step towards the realization of
universal brotherhood is the Sikh emphasis on seva (disinterested
service) which extends from labour of the hands in Guru ka Langar or
community kitchen to hospitality and charity and to readiness to making
any sacrifice to help the oppressed and relieve their distress. The
essentials of Sikh message can be summed up from three perspectives:
loving involvement with God's revelation through nam, i.e. remembrance
or repetition of His Name, straining for the achievement of basic needs,
and holding as common possession the fruits of one’s labour—partaking of
them only upon having dealt with the needs especially of the indigent. In
Sikh system, these norms are represented by the three principles: nam
Japna, kirat karni and vand chhakna.

456. Sikh rahit as based on the teachings of the Gurus and rahitnamas
became lax during the comparative ease and prosperity of Sikh rule in the
Punjab. Leaders of the reformatory movements such as Nirankari,
Namdhari and Singh Sabha during the fatter half of the nineteenth
century sought to restore the purity of belief and living a pattern in
consonance with Sikh tenets. New codes and manuals appeared,
especially under the auspices of the Singh Sabha. Fundamentalist in
approach was Khalsa Rahit Prakash adopted at an open meeting by Panch
Khalsa Diwan at Damdama Sahib on 13 April 1905, and later released by
Babu Teja Singh. At the other extreme, making many a concession ta

Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925. On 15 March 1927, it appointed a 28-member
Rahu-rit (i.e. rahit Mmatyada) sub-committee “to prepare a draft rahu-rit in
the light of rahitnamas and other Sikh texts and in consultation with
leading Sikh scholars,” Later, the task was entrusted to Professor Teja
Singh, of Khalsa. College, Amritsar, who prepared a draft which was
Published in the April 1931 issue of the Gurdwara Gazette, the official

the sangat and in the gurdwara. Instructions regarding the time-bound
and open-ended reading of the Gury Granth Sahib, karah Prased (sacred
food or Sacrament) and Katha, te, discourse on the Scripture as well as
rules of social and Moral conduct and ceremonies such as those
concerning birth, Marriage and death are also given in this section. The
section on panthic rahinj includes sub-sections on Guru Panth (the Sikh
community or.the Khalsa); initiation ceremony of the Khalsa; procedure -
for gurmata or formal resolution adopted in the Presence of the Guru;
3
3
5

io

or

215

and, finally, authority of the Akal Takht to hear and decide on appeals
against the decisions of local sangats,

Rahitname

457. RAHITNAME, plural of rahitnama (rahit= conduct, stipulated
conduct or way of life: name letters, writings, manuais) is a term used in
Punjabi in reference to a genre of writings specifying approved way of life
for a Sikh. These writings, enunciating conduct and behaviour in
accordance with the Principles of the Sikh religion contain instructions
regarding personal! and social behaviour, applicable especially to those

Guru Nanak in another of his hymns (GG, 831). And “rahini, i.e. conduct
moulded in accordance with sabda, is the truest conduct” (GG, 56). Rahit
as right thinking and right action is also distinguished from rahit. as
outward formal appearance by Guru Arjan, Nanak Vv: “(The misguided

and is not beguiled by externa! form” (GG, 169). Besides these genera!
statements, more specific instructions for the moral guidance of a believer
are found scattered throughout the Sikh scriptures,

history, the most important are the utterances traced directly to the
Gurus, especially Guru Gobind Singh who laid down, at the time of the
inauguration of the Khaisa in 1699, rules of conduct and introduced
regulations to confer upon his followers a distinctive identity, However,
these sources do not, strictly speaking, belong to the genre known as
rahitnamas, Bhai Nand Lal and some other Sikhs contemporary or near-

216

contemporary with Guru Gobind Singh compiled the first rahitnamas. The
chief Khalsa Diwan’s Gurmat Prakash Bhag Sanskar (Amritsar, 1915),
Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee’s Sikh Rahit Maryada
(Amritsar, 1950) and the English translation Rahit Maryada: A Guide to
the Sikh Way of Life (London, 1971) are the modern versions of
rahitnamas.

459. The authorship and dates of composition of some of the latter-day
rahitnamas are not above dispute: interpolations are not ruled out, either.
Most of these works are ascribed to Sikhs closely connected with Guru
Gobind Singh; they are in some instances described as dictated or
authenticated by the Guru himself. However, these claims or that they
belong to the 1 7th or early 18th century do not stand strict scrutiny.

460. Three of Bhai Nand Lal’s works fall in the category of rahitnamas.
Rahitnama Bhai Nand Lal,.in Sadhukari verse, is in the form of a dialogue
between the poet and Guru Gobind Singh during which the latter
expounds the rules of conduct laid down for a gursikh or true follower of
the faith. The penultimate verse.(22) of the Rahitnama indicates that this
dialogue took place at Anandpur on 5 December 1695, i.e. before the
creation of the Khalsa. That explains the absence from it of any reference
to panj-kakari rahit, i.e. the five-symbol discipline of the Khalsa. In the
text every Sikh is enjoined to rise early in the morning, take his bath and,
having recited Japu and Jap, to go to see the Guru among the sangat and
to listen attentively to the holy word being expounded. He should attend
the evening service comprising Rahrasi, Kirtan (or Kirtan Sohila) and
discourse. In answer to Nand Lal's request to elaborate the phrase
“Guru's darshan” i.e. a sight of the Guru, the latter explains that the Guru
has three aspects, first nirguna (without attributes or transcendent), the
second sarguna (with attributes or qualities) and gursabda, (the Guru in
form of sabda). The first (Vahiguru) is beyond sensory perception, but
Guru in the second form can be seen manifested in the entire creation or
more concretely in (Guru) Granth Sahib, the Sikh Scripture. “Whoever
wishes to. see me,” said Guru Gobind Singh, “should see Granthji and
should listen attentively to and reflect upon the Guru’s word contained in
it.” His third form,-explained the Guru, is his Sikh. “A Gursikh who having
totally banished his ego dedicates himself whole-heartedly to service and
observes these rules truly represents me.”

217

461. In format, language and style, Bhai Nand Lal's Tankhahnama, his
second work, follows the same model as his Rahitnama, but.in content it
deals directly with rules and injunctions, especially those breach of which
attracts a religious penalty, tankhah in Sikh terminology. Punishment
prescribed in this Tankhahnama is neither corporeal nor pecuniary, but
consists in Guru’s displeasure or imprecation. Who becomes liable to
tankhah? He who ignores nam, dan and isnana (glorification of God's
name, charity, holy bath); who Joins not regularly the satsang or holy
fellowship; who allows -his mind to wander while sitting among the
company of the holy; who expresses hatred for a poor member of the
community; who does not bow to the sabda; who is selfish and greedy
while distributing karah Prasad or the holy communion; who puts on the
rulers’ Turkish turban; who touches a sword with the toe; who distributes
karah prasad or /angar without being in full regalia; who dons red
apparel; who uses tobacco-snuff; who looks lasciviously upon the
womenfolk; who is easily enraged; who gives a daughter or sister in
marriage for money; who wears not the sword; who deprives a helpless
person of his money or belongings; who Pays not the dasvandh or tithe;
who bathes not in cold water; who eats supper without reciting the
Rahrasi; who goes to sleep at night without reciting the Kirtan Sohila;
who stands not by his word; who combs not his hair twice daily; who ties
not his turban afresh every day; who brushes not the teeth regularly;
who slanders others; who eats flesh of an animal slaughtered slowly in
the Muslim way: who sings compositions other than those of the Gurus;
who attends performances by dancing girls; who goes to his work without
@ prayer to the Guru; who breaks his fast without making an offering to
the Guru; who commits adultery; who gives not alms to the deserving:
who indulges in abuse; who gambles: who hears without protest calumny
against the Guru; who earns his livelihood by cheating others; who eats
without uttering the word Vahiguru; who visits a prostitute; who moves
about with head uncovered; who heeds not the Guru's word; and so on.

462. Although Tankhahnama refers to the Khalsa as an established order
of devoutly religious warriors, it makes no reference to its five symbols or
to the taboos. Besides religious and moral practices of a general nature, it
alludes to rules of personal and social etiquette, even of personal hygiene,
The last verse of Tankhahnama, which the Sikhs usually recite in unison
after ardas, contains the weill-familiar litany, Raj karega Khalsa.

Cea ES ph ee an eee

218

463. Sakhi Rahit Ki, also ascribed to Bhai Nand Lal, is a summary in
Punjabi prose of a dialogue between Bhai Nand Lal and Guru Gobind
Singh. The Guru adjures his Khalsa to bow only before the Guru's word
and shun Brahmanical beliefs, rites and rituals. Use of tobacco and
trimming or shaving of hair are prohibited. So are adultery, thieving,
backbiting and slander. Positive injunctions include early rising, daily
ablutions, reciting nitnem, honest work, love of sabda and hospitality.

464, Rahitnama Bhai Prahilad Singh is a short poem comprising 38
couplets. It is anachronistically dated at Abchalnagar (Nanded) in 1695
when Guru Gobind Singh was still in Anandpur. Prahilad Singh, Prahilad
Rai before his initiation as a Singh, was a scholarly Brahman who at the
instance of Guru Gobind Singh rendered into bhakha vernacular 50
Upanisads which Prince Dara Shukoh had got translated into Persian. His
Rahitnama forbids a Sikh to wear a cap or a janeu, the sacred thread of
the caste Hindus. It forbids association with masands, with the heretic
sect called Minas, with those who shave their heads or with those who
practise female infanticide. Use of snuff is also forbidden. The Sikhs must
shun idolatry and the worship of graves. They must have faith only in
God, the Guru Granth Sahib, and the GurusKhalsa.

465. Rahitnama Bhai Daya Singh presents in prose, to begin with, the
rules of conduct as coming from the lips of Guru Gobind Singh himself; in
this case the author is the first among the Panj Piare. The reference in it
to Muktsar and Abchalnagar, injunction against the learning of Persian
and Sanskrit and the mythical origin of the ceremony of amrit create
doubts about its authorship. Besides the usual injunctions regarding the
recitation of nitnem, the five symbols of the Khalsa, the K’s, 1am
simaran, etc., and those prohibiting idolatry and Brahmanical practices,
the distinctive features of this Rahitnama are. the description of how
amrit is prepared and administered; proclamation that Khalsa is the
incarnation of God; the names of the five Muktas; prescription of fine and
corporeal punishment for certain religious offences, and procedure for the
redemption of offenders; recognition of Granth-Panth as Guru; inclusion
of Dhirmallias and Ram Raias among the fallen sects to be boycotted
socially; and minutiae with regard to some minor prescriptions and

prohibitions.

466. Rahitnama Hazuri, also called Rahitnama Bhai Chaupa Singh, is the
most elaborate statement of rules of conduct for the Sikhs. Its authorship
is traditionally ascribed to Bhai Chaupa Singh Chhibbar, who had been in

ey

219

attendance upon Guru Gobind Singh since his (the Guru's) childhood.
Kesar Singh Chhibbar describes briefly in his Bansavalinama how Guru
Gobind Singh decided to have the rules of Khalsa conduct codified and
recorded, and how the Guru responded, shortly before the siege of
Anandpur and its evacuation, to the requests from his Sikhs by
commanding Chaupa Singh to write a rahitnama. When Chaupa Singh
humbly professed insufficient competence for so weighty a responsibility,
he was reassured by the promise that the Guru himself would inspire and
direct his words. Dutifully, he recorded a rahitnama a copy of which
written in the hand of Sita! Singh Bahrupia was taken to the Guru for his
imprimatur. A second copy was then prepared by a Sud Sikh and this too
was certified by the Guru. The work was, according to internal evidence,
authenticated by Guru Gobind Singh on 7 Jeth 1757 Bk/S May 1700. The
Guru ordered, it further states, that more copies of it should be got
similarly attested and no additions to it were to be made, The concluding
portion of this Rahitnama containing dates 1759 Bk and 1763 Bk {AD
1702 and 1706) is apparently an addition by Chaupa Singh or by
interpolators Jater. The extant text of the Rahitnama seems to be a
composite work drawn from at least three different sources. It begins as a
formal rahitnama presenting a regular series of injunctions, but then
switches over to a narrative sequence. l. subsequently returns to its

formal presentation of the rahit abandoning it again for another extended
narrative sequence.

467. Of the 1800 injunctions contained in the Rahitnama the main ones
are: A Sikh should regularly say his nitnem, and be always alert in
attending to his duty and earn his living by the labour of his hands; he
should have no dealing with minas, masands, ramraias, the shaven ones,
and with those who practise female infanticide; he should not drink
liquor; he should never be parted from the five, viz. kachchh (shorts), kes
(hair), kirpan (sword), bani and sangat, he should not use nor deal in
tobacco and should not give his daughter in marriage to one who smokes;
he shouid regularly set aside dasvandh or tithe, and he should not trade
in pothis or manuscript copies of gurbani. A special feature of Rahitnama
Hazuri is a section devoted to Sikh women. Some of the stipulations: they
should not bathe naked; should ensure personal hygiene and cleanliness
while cooking or serving; should not abuse a male; should cover their
heads while in sangat; should learn to read (Guru) Granth Sahib but must
not read it in public; they should not be baptized; should shun unclean
Songs and jokes; should be religious, modest and chaste; and so on.
220

468. The Rahitnama contains a classic catalogue of Sikh characteristics
and virtues. In a free English rendering: Sikh faith is his who honours his
kes and preserves them to his very last breath; who recites the sabda;
who finds his fulfilment in doing his duty; who reflects on the Guru's
teaching; who is armed with the weapon of chastity; whose word is truth;
who accepts the preordained law; who rejoices in feeding others; who
believes in the sovereignty of the sword; who worships the Timeless One;
who adores the weapons; who has a reputation for charity; who exudes
fragrance of his Sikh faith; who earns repute by his readiness to serve

others; who commands the sweetness of speech; who is true to his salt;

who is modest in his appearance; whose grihastha is with his gentle wife
of good breeding; who lives always in the Lord's presence; who adores his
family; who obeys the command of the Guru; who lives by the teachings
of the Guru Granth Sahib; who rejoices in the rites of the Khalsa; who
remains awake singing the Lord’s praise; who dutifully washes his kes;
who abjures wrong-doing; who is alert in his conduct; who is disciplined
in his speech; whose rahit is truly in his heart rather than merely
external; who holds his belief discerningiy; who owns the Guru; who loves
his fellow Sikhs; who serves his father and mother; who recites bani from
memory; who has his mind in control; who attains authority though in
service; who has love in his heart; ~‘ho shares with others what he has;
who. annihilates his sins; whose dealings are marked by propriety; whose
addiction is prasad, i.e. karah prasad (the Sikh sacrament); who is ready
for a square fight: who acknowledges the power of the Word; who
contributes to the advancement of dharma; who is desirous always of
contemplating on His Name. ;

469, However, the extant texts of the Rahitnama are adulterated and
contain injunctions which are in conflict with approved Sikh teaching. It
grants, for example, a position of privilege to the Brahman and orders a
contemptuous ostracizing of the Muslims. The presence of strong Puranic
element and the influence of the Devi cult are some of the other possible
corruptions in the extant texts,

470. Rahitnama Bhal Desa Singh is admittedly a late-18th-century work,
It is in the form of a long poem of 146 couplets and short four-line
stanzas. The poet states that he had lived in Bunga Maralivala at Amritsar
where Sardar Jassa Singh (Ahluvalia) has also lived for a long time. From
there, in old age, he visited Patna. During his travels after that, he once
in a dream was ordered by. Guru Gobind Singh to write down a code of
conduct for the Sikhs. Bhai Desa Singh lays particular stress on the
iB

ww ¥

www

~— — or

221

from backbiting and slander; should use vahiguruji ki fateh as the form of
salutation and greeting, should recite regularly ordered texts; should treat
all women other than his wife as daughters or mothers; must maintain
the five symbols of the Sikhs; must not flee the battlefield; should make
pilgrimage to the Sikh holy places; should serve only the Khalsa or should
engage in agriculture, trade or industry, but should not seek employment
with the Turks nor indulge in theft or robbery; should be an intent listener
at recitals of Guru Granth Sahib and at religious discourses; must not use

the Musiim fashion); should eat Jhatka (flesh of animal killed in the Sikh
manner with a single blow), if at ail; must learn reading and writing the
Gurmukhi script; must beware of the five sins, viz. adultery, gambiing,
lying, stealing and liquor; should not criticize other religious faiths; should
not live on offerings made at gurdwaras; even a Sikh minister should
spend out of the offerings sparingly for his personal use and spend the

Sahaj

471. SAHAJ, in Sikh vocabulary, refers to a state of mental and Spiritual!
equipoise without the least intrusion of €go; unshaken natural and
effortless Serenity attained through spiritual discipline. Ego (aham or
haumai) develops out of the undifferentiated primordial being as a result
of the socio-cultural conditioning factors that generate as a result of a
Process of individuation. Ego is thus a mere psychic substantive, a myth
that not only begins to shroud the primordia! nature of the human soul,
but also is responsible for all kinds of emotional and volitional
disturbances, When this ego is quelled, and one resides once again in the
i , UNdisturbed, effortless state of the soul, sahaj is said to have been
attained, Although called a state (avastha), in fact it transcends ail states,

for itis a return to the soul as it was before any ‘states’ differentiated or
derived from it.

222

472. The word sahaj is derived from Sanskrit twin roots: saha, together,
and ja, born. Thus, it means born together (with oneself), hence innate,
It signifies innate nature, or one’s natural spontaneous self shorn of al
external conditioning influences that cramp the soul. Sahaj is, thus,
renascent freedom or liberation of the soul.

473. The term has a long history. The basic concept came from the leftist
Tantric cults in whose vocabulary sahaj signified a protest against the
formalism of orthodox religion. They decried the bondage of artificial
conventions and affirmed the non-transgression of the natural. Sahaj
was, thus, the basic tenet of the Indian antinomianism. The Sahajyana
Buddhists, Natha Yogis, and Sahajiya Saivites, all in their own time and in
their specific way, emphasized the cultivation of sahaj, but they were all
in a sense Tantric in outlook, for the raison d’etre of these schools with
the solitary exception of the Nathapanthis was to be found in particular
sexoyogic practices as a part of religious sadhna. However, the followers
of these sects, in fact, seem to have stretched their antinomian protest to
its utmost limit and held that the most meritorious acts are such natural
ones as eating and drinking which sustain life, sexual intercourse which
propagates it, and the natural functions which give it ease. In actual
practice, it really amounted to a total surrender to carnal appetites. As a
result of this, these cults went into disrepute and the original concept of"
sahaj became besmirched with questionable ethical connotations. Its
reintroduction into the Indian mystic lore by the preceptors of the Sikh
faith signified a new turn in the history of this term, for they invested it
with a new breadth of meaning and mystical import couple 1 with sublime
ethical and aesthetic connotations that conduced to the elevation of the
soul.

474. The Sikh concept of sahaj shared with that of the sects mentioned
(a) rejection of external formalities, (b) rejection of priestly authority, and
in a positive way, (c) recognition of the guru as essential for spiritual
growth and advancement, and (d) recognition of the Ultimate Reality as
an experience of unruffled equipoise and ineffable bliss. However, it
differed from them not only in its rejection at once of sexoyogic practices
(of Sahajayanis) as well as in the derogation of women (of Nathapanthis),
but even in the breadth of conceptualization. For the Gurus, man’s
original nature was of the nature of light or intuitive knowledge “man tun
Joti sarupu hai apana mulu pachhanu" (GG, 441). A reattainment of this
natural self, with its attendant peace and equipoise is sahaj. In this state,

223

life is unaffected by any artificiality or put-up appearances for they are
but the defences of the empirical ego (hauma/) and that, in sahaj, is
conquered, Then with a basic dispositional spontaneity, love goodness
and compassion blossom forth from the being. This widened concept of
sahaj signifies a transcendent state—one beyond the ordinary modes of
being (gunas), beyond the habitual levels of consciousness and beyond
the illusion of duality or maya.

475. To appreciate fully the breadth of meaning of the Sikh concept of
sahaj, it may be looked at from various aspects. In its cognitive aspect, it
can be seen as a state of illumination, one of heightened consciousness,

dissolution of the latter, these disappear, distances vanish and reality
comes to be perceived with the impact of immediacy. In its cognitive
aspect, sahaj is a state of freedom wherein everything happens with
natural ease (sahaj subhar), Spontaneity is the ground of every kind of
behaviour—vegetative, emotive and moral. On’ the emotive or aesthetic
planes, it signifies the discovery of the great harmony within as wel} as
without. In sahaj, as it were, an inner door (dasam dvar) of aesthetic
perception opens up and one directly perceives the rhythmicity of one’s
being weave an ‘unstruck melody’ (anhat nad) which is accompanied by a
pervading feeling of unconditioned bliss (sahaj anand),

476. A deeper significance of existence seems to emerge in sahaj, When
one becomes oriented to it, emotional turbulence ceases. Pleasures and
Pains pass like ripples over the surface while the mighty deep underneath
remains unruffled. Then, it appears, one dons pleasures and Pains just as
one changes one’s garments “sukhu dukhu dui dari kapare pahirahi Jal
manukh'(GG, 149). This is how sahaj epitomizes mental equipoise in
which all turbulence of emotions is calmed. While the egocentrics abide in
doubt and carry anxieties in their heart which permit them. to sleep, the
wise wake and sleep in sahaj— “manmukhi bharamai sahasa hovai antari
chinta nid na sovai giani jagahi savahi subhai nanak nami ratia bali jau’
(GG, 646). Peace being the hallmark of this state, all running about and
all feverish Pursuits cease. Wandering itself is worn out for now a new
dignity in life is found. ,

224

477. Sahaj has been called a state of freedom. It betokens freedom from
desire (trsna), from conflict (dvandva) and from illusion (maya). One is
liberated from the cramping influence of social compulsions, yet one does
not become a fugitive from social responsibility. On the contrary, since
one is also cured simultaneously of the equally cramping compulsion of
egoism, one no longer lives for oneself. One lives more for others. In
sahaj one is also liberated from the servility of carnat needs. In this state
neither drowsiness, nor hunger remains: and one ever abides in the
Divine Bliss of Hari Nam (God’s Name). Pleasure and sorrow occur not
where the all-pervading self shineth forth—“gurmukhi antari sahaju hai
manu chatia dasavai akasi tithai ungh na bhukh hai hari amrit namu sukh
vasu nanak dukhu sukhu viapat nahijithai atam ram pragasu" (GG, 1414),

478. Sahaj also spells an awareness of the great vital harmony
(sahajdhuni) within as one gets attuned to the inner rhythm of Being. One
also simultaneously discovers self-same harmony and _ mystical
rhythmicity pervading the entire gamut of the mighty cosmos. The
intensity of this experience is a great aesthetic wonderment. It is a
creative joy of the highest order—sheer ‘joy’ in contradistinction to
‘enjoyment’ of the sense objects, It is; theréfore, not ephemeral like the
latter, but is an abiding state of ufdiminishing bliss. Although
illumination, spontaneity, freedom, equipoise, and harmony may be
described as the chief characteristics of sahaj, there are several other
subtle characteristics of this state alluded to at several places in the Guru
Granth Sahib as, for example, in the following passage:-

One who abideth in sahaj

Looketh alike on friend and foe.

What he heareth is essence true:

And in his seeing is meditation.

He sleepeth in calm, he riseth in peace

From ‘being’ to ‘becoming’ with natural ease,
Sad or glad, he abideth in sahaj; |
Effortless his silence; spontaneous his utterance.
In poise he eateth, in poise he loveth.

In sahaj he findeth distances bridged.

(GG, 236)

5
iS]

a

225

479. It is thus the supremest Spiritual state. How can, then, this state be
attained? Actions, however meritorious, do not bring it about. In fact,
sahaj does not sprout so long as one abideth in maya—"mata vichi sahaju
na upajal maia dujai bhai” (GG, 68). To become detached from the world
of maia (maya), one does not need actions, but gian Uinana), which
comes from the grace of the Guru. Says Guru Amar Das: “O brother!
there can be no sahaj without the Guru’s benevolence. Sahaj sprouts
from the Word, whereby one meets the Lord—the true Cne—“pbhaij re gur
binu sahaju na hoi... .” (GG, 68). From the true Word emanates the
sahajdhuni (the tune of sahaj) and the mind gets absorbed in Truth—
“sachal sabadi sahaj dhuni upajai mani sachai liv fai” (GG, | 234). And
then the very music of sahaj that is being played at His door, also

becomes the brandmark of the seeker—“tere duarai dhuni sahaj ki mathai
mere dagai” (GG, 970).

Sahajdhari

480. SAHAJDHARI, a gradualist among Sikhs. Like other Sikhs, the
Sahajdharis believe in the Ten Gurus and in ‘the Guru Granth Sahib,
though they exempt themselves from the obligation of keeping their hair
unshorn. Receiving the rites of Khalsa baptism one day and maintaining
long uncut hair and beard remain, nevertheless, the ultimate idea! which
they must realize in their lifetime OF see it realized by their offspring.
Some Sahajdhari parents place themselves under a vow to rear their first-
born son as a full Sikh. The Sahajdharis, as a rule, are not given the Sikh
surname of ‘Singh’. The term sahajdharis is a compound of two words —
sahaj and dhari. The word sahaj (in Sanskrit, sahaja) implies poise,
unhurriedness and the word dhari Stands for adopting or accepting a
creed or form. This term came into use after Guru Gobind ‘Singh
inaugurated the Khalsa in 1699 A D., introducing the khande di bahul, ie.
baptism by the double-edged sword. Those who took khande di pahul
received the title of the ‘Khalsa’, and those who for one reason or another
could not came to be known as Sahajdharis, i.e. Sikhs who would have
themselves baptized as Khalsa at some later stage. It was, in the first
instance, not possible to have baptism administered all at once by the
rites established by Guru Gobind Singh to Sikhs in far-flung sangats.
Another impediment was the conflict which broke out between the Sikhs
and the ruling authority soon after, However, Sahajdharis have been part
of the larger Sikh body since the time of Guru Gobind Singh. Two of them
in his own day—Bhai Nand Lal and Bhai Kanhaiya —enjoyed great
esteem. Bhai Nand Lal, a great Persian scholar and poet, maintained at

Anandpur a /angar or refectory open to visitors all the twenty-four hours.
Bhai Kanhaiya won the Guru’s admiration and is remembered in the Sikh
tradition to this day for the devotion with which he served the wounded in
battle, making no distinction between friend and foe. In the early part of
the eighteenth century when Sikhs suffered fierce persecution and when
to be a Kesadhari, that is to bear kesa or long hair, was to invite sure
death, the Sahajdharis looked after their places of worship and protected
the households and the kith and kin of those driven to seek safety in hill
and jungle. Some even defied the persecutors and courted martyrdom as
did the teenaged Haqiqat Rai, who was beheaded in public for his refusal
to disown his Sikh belief and accept Islam. A leading Sahajdhari Sikh of
that time was Kaura Mall, a minister to the Mughal governor of Lahore,
Mu‘in ul-Mulk (1748-53), who helped the Sikhs in diverse ways in those
days of severe trial. He had so endeared himself to them that they cailed
him Mittha (‘sweet’, in Punjabi) Mall instead of Kaura (which, in Punjabi,
means ‘bitter’) Mall. Sikh tradition also recalls another Sahajdhari, Des
Raj, of this period who was entrusted by the Khalsa with the task of
having reconstructed the Harimandar, demolished by the Afghan invader,
Ahmad Shah Durrani, in 1762. Dina Nath was Maharaja Ranjit Singh’s
finance minister. Bhai Vasti Ram, a learned man well versed in Sikh
scripture, enjoyed considerable influence at the court.

481. Sahajdharis have continued to participate in Sikh life right up to
modern times and have associated themselves with Sikh institutions and
organizations such as the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee,
Chief Khalsa Diwan, Shiromani Akali Dal, and the All-India Sikh Students
Federation. The Singh Sabhas used to have seats on their executive
committees reserved for the Sahajdharis. Among their own societies,
confined prior to the migrations of 1947, mainly to north-western India,
were the Sahajdhari Committee of Multan, Guru Nanak Sahajdhari Diwan
of Panja Sahib and Sri Guru Nanak Sahajdhari Jatha of Campbellpore.
The Sahajdhari Diwan of Panja Sahib attained the status of their central .
forum. They as well had their annual conference which met for its first
session on 13 April 1929 under the chairmanship of Sir Jogendra Singh
who passed on the office to the famous Sikh scholar: and savant, Bhai
Kahn Singh. A Sahajdharis’ meeting formed part of the annual
proceedings of the Sikh Educational Conference.

482. The Sahajdharis share with the main body of the Sikhs all of their
religious and social customs and ceremonies and join their congregations
in the gurdwaras. The population in the Punjab of Sahajdhari Sikhs
227

(another name used is Sikh Nanakpanthis) according to 1891 Census was
397,000 (20% of the total Sikh Population); according to 1901 Census,

(14.9% of the total Sikhs); according to 1921 Census, 229 000 (7% of
the total Sikhs); according to 1931 Census, 282,000 (6.5% of the total
Sikhs). Outside of the Punjab, the North-West Frontier Province and Sindh
had considerabie Sahajdhari Populations, Consequent upon the partition
of India in 1947, Sahajdharis became widely dispersed in the country.
Their India-wide forum was the Sarab Hind (All-India) Sahajdharis
Conference which rotated from town to town for its annuat sessions.
Three of its presidents—Mahant Karam Chand, Bhai Sant Ram and Bhai
Ram Lal Rahi—eventually took the vows of Khaisa baptism, receiving
respectively the names Gur Darshan Singh, Sant Ram Singh and Ram Lal
Singh Rahi,

existent, Unchanging Reality or the Self-existent, Universal Spirit,
Brahman or God, The term sant came into vogue much later. The word

occurs frequently in the ancient Pali literature of Buddhism in the sense of
tranquil, true or wise. From Pali it was resuscitated during the middle

who is a follower of that Sampradaya. Not that followers of other
Sampradayas aré not ‘Santas’ but the followers of the Varkari
Sampradaya are santas par excellence.” Within the Bhaktj Movement

the indiviquat and the deity, but their deity, although usually given
Vaisnava names, is the Absolute Reality, Unborn, Formless, All-pervading,

228

Self-existent, nirguna (without attributes) God, who makes Himself
manifest the Name (nam) which may be uttered or meditated upon.
Nirguni bhaktas refute avatarvada or incarnation, but they believe that

the sant, through living a life of piety and practising nam, can attain final
release.

484. Through Bhakti the term passed into the Sikh tradition. In the Guru
Granth Sahib there is frequent mention of the status and significance of
the sant, a holy man who represents the salt of the earth and the hope of
mankind. Guru Arjan defines a sant thus: “jina sasi girasi na visrai
harinaman mani mantu/ dhannu si sei nanaka puranu soj santu—They
who do not put away from their minds the Name Divine even for the
duration of a breath or as they swallow a morse! are indeed blessed, 0

Nanak! They are the perfect sants” (GG, 319). Guru Arjan in another
hymn:-

All the twenty-four hours of day and night,

He knows God to be close to his heart,

And to His will he cheerfully submits.

Name alone is the sustenance of the sant

A sant considers himself to be the dust of the feet of all.
This, brothers, is the sants’ way of life,

Beyond my power is it to describe its excellence.
Name alone is their occupation,

In blissful Kirtan do they find their peace.

Friend and foe are to them alike.

Besides their God they acknowledge not another.
Myriad sins can a Sant erase,

He is the dispeller of sorrow and the bestower of life.
Heroes true to their word are the sants,

Even poor maya Is by them beguiled.

The gods themselves long for their company;

5)
a

Ye

Se ED

uy

e oe ge w&

ow w

w? @ Ww w Ww

bs

Ge

229

To have a sight of them is fulfilling in the extreme,
To be able to serve them a blessing.

Nanak does with folded hands supplicate:

Grant me this favour, O Treasure of Merit, .

that to the service of the sants do I

dedicate myself. (GG, 392)

Sant Tradition

485. SANT TRADITION comprises those medieval monotheistic and
devout personalities belonging to different shades of Indian society who
are supposed to have been quiet, tranquil non-sectarian, opposed to
Brahmanical ritualism, piously tired of the duplicity of the world but
otherwise deeply conscious and critical of the outrageous anomalies
professed by certain vested interests among the people around. In

general terms these mystical personalities are known as nirgun bhaktas
or more commonly sants.

486. The Sanskrit form of the term sant is rooted in sam meaning
‘appeased’ or ‘pacified’, Sometimes this tradition is directly linked with
Vedic and Upantsadic thought but very often it is accepted as influenced
by Sahajyana, an offshoot of Buddhism. Commonly the practices of Sant
tradition are remembered as Hathayogic, however, with the exception of
Sikhism which, sufficiently influenced by this tradition, has repudiated all
sorts of mortifications of body through Hathayoga. Very early the term
sant had acquired two specific connotations. On the one hand, it served to
designate a school or rather a particular group of Vaisnava bhaktas
devoted to the incarnations of Visnu and hence called sagunvadins but on
the other we find Guru Nanak, Ravidas, Kabir, Dadu, Paltu, etc., who
without getting led astray by excessive emotionalism never miss to
delineate their last aim of liberal attitude, universal thinking and hence a
pure ethical code of conduct. The vast literature of this tradition radiates a

specific dynamic energy containing in it a challenge of frankness and
fearlessness,

487. It is significant to note that often the term sant is distinguished
from bhakta by calling them nirgunvadins and sagunvadins, respectively.
In Marathi literature the worshippers of qualified God and the meditators
of the unattributed Supreme Being, both are called bhaktas and the latter
230

ones sants. However, there is a’ sharp difference in their dispositions. We

find bhakta literature replete with the warm emotions for the incarnations
of God. but in nirguna literature the sants contradict this theory. They
don't involve themselves in the riddles of hell’ and heaven and their
worship is realizational and not based on sastras. The sants seem little
bothered about the hollow premises and rhetoric. They spread from the
fourteenth to the eighteenth centuries of the Christian era throughout the
whole of north India and part of the Deccan. Within the tradition on itself
the term sant seems to have been used as a synonym for sadh or sadhu
in the sense of one who has “perfected” or “accomplished” the ultimate
unitary experience. The sant tradition of medieval India, though
predominantly theistic and devotional unlike the Sramana tradition, is
however supposed to have carried forward the moral and social ideas and
ideals of non-Brahmanical origin first diffused by the ancient moons and
shamans. In this medieval period the emphasis on a personal God stems
from a tendency, in Indian religions, which became prominent in the
Upanisads, to find divinity present, immanent in nature and by extension,
in the very being of man. We must also note that the personalization of
the deity in Vaisnavite religion and in certain sects which worshipped local
anthropomorphic forms of the deity was countered by the general
pantheistic tendency of the Upanisads with their emphasis on the identity
of all with the Divine. Caught between the various sectarian developments
and. driven towards a personalization of deity on the one hand and
accepting the monistic tendency of much of earlier Indian philosophy on
the other, the people of India, drew on the earlier tradition of munis and
sramanas to establish numerous sects of practitioners of the discipline of
yoga and of wandering sants and yogis with differing degrees of spiritual
realization and theories about the manner of achieving it. The influence of
Mahayana Buddhism, especially of its esoteric variety lingered in India
long after the final disappearance of the Buddhist Sangha in its homeland.
Further, the institution of the Buddhist monks and several philosophical
moral doctrines of Buddhism became incecrporated into Hinduism in its
reflowering from the eighth century of the Christian era onwards.

488. In this milieu the Sant tradition was essentially a synthesis of four
principal dissenting movements, a compound of elements drawn from the
Mahayanism of the siddhas, the vaisnava bhakhi, the Hathayoga of the
Nath-yogins and with a marginal contribution from Sufism. The non-vedic
strand in the Sant tradition was an important legacy of Buddhism and the

. Numerous terms and concepts of Buddhism of the siddhas found a fasting

home in the writings of the sants. In several respects, however, the sants

)8 OE OO 6 6

y

@ &

ood

231

disagreed with traditional Vaisnava-bhakti

also and some of these
differences were fundamental,

such as their {sants)) rejection of

experience for the people of medieval northern Indi
habitually worshipping some sort of ‘qualified’
gods or goddesses. The bhakti of sants is gener
bhakti but in this bhakti a monisti
was injected by their chief exponents like Kabir
sants eschewed all forms of idolatry,
the worship of Rama and Krsna. True,

a, for they had been

490. The sants were basically monotheists, but the ultimate Reality
(paramatattva) whom they addressed and with whom they sought union
was in no sense to be understood in anthropomorphic terms. His

. Manifestation was through His immanence in His creation and, in

particular, through His indwelling in the human soul. It was there that He,
by grace (prasad), revealed Himself, and man’s appropriate response was
love and devotion (namsumiran) as a means of merging with the Divine.
Great importance was attached to the guru who might be a human
teacher or who might be understood not as a person but as the inner
voice of God. The sants attached littte importance to celibacy and
asceticism and hence together with the sufis they were commonly laymen
or householders rather than monks or ascetics in the formal sense. The
spirit of the movement was essentially non-sectarian though many of the
sants left their names to the sects which sprang up in their wake, of
which certain ones still survive today,

491. Their beliefs the sants expressed not in the classical Sanskrit
language, but in a language which was closely related to that of the
common people to whom they addressed: their teachings. There seems to
have evolved a “dialect” which, with minor modifications, was used by the
sants all over northern India. The basis of this dialect, which has been
called Sadhukari was Khari Boli, mixed with old Rajasthani, Braj, Panjabi
and Purvi Boli spoken in what is now eastern Uttar Pradesh. Most of the
sants were generally poorly educated or completely illiterate, and hence
their compositions were usually oral utterances which came to be written
down only after a period of oral circulation.

492. The Sant movement was composed of two principal groups during
its period of greatest importance and influence, from the fourteenth to
eighteen centuries of the Christian era, the one centred in north India and
the other centred in Maharashtra, the latter being the older.

493. It was this sant tradition which provided the basis for Guru Nanak’s
thought, an inheritance which he interpreted in the light of his own
personality. and experience. Before the advent of Sikhism, when the
onslaughts of the hordes of invaders were rampantly crushing the people,
the Indian mind and body unable to withstand it, started preaching, on
the contrary, the doctrine of illusory nature of the world. People were
advised to accept the non-existence of the very world in which they were
being cramped. Sikhism asserted itself as the most self-respecting and
fearless religious way of life to accept the challenge and to look into the
233

real cause of the malady of helplessness of men. Sikhs could not remain
passive onlookers and thus a very constructive culmination of Sant
tradition is obvious in the advent of Sikhism. The thought of Guru Nanak
was a reworking of the Sant synthesis, which he received and passed on,
which was in some measure amplified, and in considerable measure
clarified and integrated.

494. SARBATT DA BHALA, literally, Weal to all... Weal to everyone.
This is the concluding line which marks the finale or ardas or supplicatory
Prayer, with which every Sikh service or ceremony concludes. The full
couplet reads: Nanak nam Chahrdi kala tere bhane sarbatt da bhala (May
Gad’s Name, may the human spirit forever triumph, Nanak: And in Thy
will may peace and prosperity come to one and all). Sarbatt (lit. all) here
does not stand for members of a particular sect, community or nation, but
for the whole humankind. Sarbatt da bhala is not a mere pious profession
of goodwill for all beings: itis a living concept in the Sikh tradition central
to the Gurus’ spiritual vision. A line in the Scripture reads, “eky Dita ekas
ke ham barik—the One Lord God is the father of all of us; of the One Lord
aré we the children” (GG, 611). Belief in One Absolute and Infinite
Creator God is a fundamental postulate of the Sikh faith. God is the
creator, the ultimate ground of all that exists. From God emanated man.
Man, in Sikhism, is the creation of God, and he partakes of His Own Light.
The “stainless soul” within the material body is a spark of the light He is.
There can be no distinctions and divisions made among men for reasons
of birth, race, colour, country or creed. “All men are God’s own creation,”
declared Guru Nanak. “False is caste and false are worldly titles. One
Supreme Lord sustains all” (GG, 83), “Manas ki Jati sabhai ekai
Pahachanbo recognize all of the human race as one,” said Guru Gobind
Singh. This concept of a single humanity is basic to the Sikh world view.
Out of this feeling of common fellowship arises the Sikh’s wish to be of
use to others. For him religious faith will not be fully realized unless he
filled his everyday life with deeds calculated to secure the welfare of the
people as a whole.

495. Sikhism enjoins active participation in life. This Participation must
be morally based. The religious man, according to Sikhism, has to be an
engage. In the Sikh way of life, the end of Spiritual endeavour is not a
State of consciousness passively experienced; it is the attainment to a
cognitive, affective, conative condition of being which is characterized as
much by active goodwill for all beings as by the discovery of the true
essence of things and the attendant joy and equipoise. Truth, as says

Guru Nanak in his Japu, is attained by subjecting oneself to a
multidimensional discipline which comprises not only the willing direction
of one’s mind to the pursuit of spiritual enlightenment, intellectual
discernment through knowledge, the cultivation of an: aesthetic sensibility
and harmony. with Divine will, but also persistent effort to promote the
general good. Habitual pursuit of the common good marks the peak of
spiritual ascent; it is through consistent striving for the welfare of others
that the process of devotion is brought to perfection. “Without doing good
to others, devotion remains imperfect—vinu gun kite bhagati na hoi” (GG,
4).

496. The end of learning is that it should impel one to serve others—vidia
Vichari ta parupkari (GG, 356). Man has, according to Sikhism, come from
the Divine and his travails will end when he merges back into the Divine.
What stands n the way of man’s union with the Divine is his haumai, his
finite ego, his divisive concern with the. self with its penumbra of base
feelings and impulses. This merger into the Divine—liberation, i.e. the
goal of Sikh spiritual quest—is attained through the obliteration of
haumai. Freedom from the bondage of haumai is achieved negatively by
restraining concern with the self and positively, and more fruitfully, by
«.Xpanding one’s affection to embrace the entire, creation. Involvement in
the welfare of others is an essential element of the Sikh spiritual and
moral ideal. It is a conscious and consistent pursuit—a deliberately
chosen principle of action rather than a momentary response to the
phenomenon of misery, want or suffering.. It is not just an act of
benevolence, but a natural disposition. A Sikh always prays for the
welfare of all. This precept of sarbatt da bhala, predicated on the belief in
the brotherhood of man and in all men being equal heirs to God's grace,
permeates the entire Sikh tradition. It was exemplified in deeds of seva,
humble, self-abnegating service in the common cause and in the Guru ka
Langar, the community refectory where all sat together to share the
meal, overruling distinctions of caste, creed or clime.

497. The value epitomized by sarbatt da bhala has been a potent factor
in the tradition and sensibility of the Sikhs. Even when they became a
militant force to fight oppression, they had not forsworn the principle.
Guru Gobind Singh, who fought severai actions against the Hindu hill
chiefs and the. Mughals, especially applauded Bhai Kanhaiya, one -of his
Sikhs who served water to the wounded on the battlefield regardless of
whether they were Sikhs or. Muslims. Qazi Nur Muhammad, a chronicler
who accompanied Ahmad. Shah Durrani on his seventh invasion of India in

@ &

Ss

6 8 @

eowwewy ev ves

Nie

oo 8 &

235

1764 and celebrated his exploits in the masnavi entitled Jang Namah,
uses imprecatory language about the Sikhs and yet pays them a
handsome tribute saying that they never chased the fleeing enemy, did
not harm a soldier who had surrendered and did not loot a woman's
valuables. Another Muslim, Ghulam Muhayy ud-Din, who had earlier taken
part in a battle against Banda Singh Bahadur wrote in his Fatuhat Namah-
i-Samadi that Sikhs did not look upon a woman except as their mother.

498. In the Sikh system, group ethics and individual morality harmonize
and are not fragmented. Sarbatt da bhale is, therefore, as much a
common human objective as it is a personal ideal. It must fead to the
individual’s ethical and spiritual perfection as also to a better world order.
Both these goals are enshrined in the daily-repeated maxim sarbatt da
bhala. Singly and in groups, in their homes and in congregations in their
places of worship, the Sikhs conclude their morning and evening prayers,
or prayer said at any other time as part of personal piety or of a
ceremony with the words—Nanak nam charhdi kala tere bhane sarbatt da
bhala, This prayer for the welfare of all mankind has thus been
institutionalized in Sikhism. For the Sikhs this is not a mere mystical

quest, but a firm religious and social goal. Towards its realization a Sikh
must constantly endeavour.

Sardar

499. SARDAR, in Persian amalgam of sar (head) and dar (a suffix
derived from the ve 5 dashtan, i.e. to hold) meaning holder of headship,
is an honorific signifying an officer of rank, a general or chief of a tribe or
organization. Sikhs among whom, during the time of the Guru and for half
a century thereafter, no words indicative of high rank were current other
than the common appellation bhai or, rarely baba to express reverence
due to age or descent from the Gurus, adopted sardar for the leaders of
their jathas or bands fighting against Afghan invaders under Ahmad Shah
Durrani. With the expansion of' the fighting force of the Sikhs under the
misis the number of Sikh sardars multiplied. During the reign of Maharaja
Ranjit Singh and his successors, sardar came to be used as an appellation
for all ready Sikhs as well as for Sikhs in general having Singh as their
commen surname, although officially sardar was a coveted title conferred
on generals or civil officers of rank. The British government also used the
Word selectively by incorporating it in the titles of sardar sahib and sardar
bahadur. conferred mostly, but not exclusively, on Sikhs. In the Sikh
princely states of Patiala, Nabha, Jind, Kapurthala, Faridkot and Kalsia,
236

too, sardar signified rank irrespective of the religious affiliation of the
official so entitled. In the army, both under the British and in free India,
junior commissioned officers called Viceroy’s Commissioned Officers (V. C,
Os) before independence are referred to as sardar sahiban, Generally,
every turbaned Sikh with unshorn hair is addressed as sardarji, and it is
customary to use sardar in piace of “Mr.” before a Sikh name,

Sati

500. SATI or sachch, Punjabi form of the Sanskrit satya or sat, lit. truth,
in the philosophical sense is essential and ultimate reality as against
inessential or partial truth. Rooted in Sanskrit as meaning “to be, live,
exist, be present, to abide, dwell, stay”, satya means “ true, real, pure,”
as also the “quality of being abidingly true, real, existent.” Satya or
satyam is a widely used term in the philosophical thought of India. It
signifies eternality, continuity and unicity. In the Upanisads sat (truth) is
the first of the three essential characteristics of Brahman, the other two
being chit (intelligence) and anand (bliss). In Vedanta philosophy, the one
permanent reality, Brahman, is called Sat, while the phenomenal fluxional
world is named asat (non-real). In the Sikh scripture and other religious
literature, sati, or sachch appears with two closely related yet
distinguishably different connotations. At the metaphysica! level, sat/ is
the Ultimate Reality, truly existent, changeless and everlasting. At the
level of physical existence, sat/ or sachch carries an ethical import as
correctness, truthfulness and goodness as against kur, wrongness or
falsehood. The varied and wide use of the cognates of sat or sati such as
satsangat, satigur, satpurakh, sachkhand, sachiar and sachcha patsah
iilustrate the role of the term in the spiritual as well as in the ethical
context.

501. In the Mu! Mantra, The One is also named sat/ besides being given
other attributive names such as karta purakh (the creative male
principle), nirbhau (without fear), nirvair (without rancour), akal murati
{the timeless form), ajun/ (unborn) and saibhang (self-existent). Guru
Arjan amplifies, “The tongue utters (mostly) your attributive names; Your
primordial name is sati” (GG, 1083); and this “True Name of God is ever
solace-giver” (GG, 284). Elsewhere in the Hojly Scripture sachu sabadu
(the Word Truth) and sacha sabadu (the True Word) or simply sach(ch)a
(the True One) have been used as synonyms of satinam to describe God
(GG, 34, 580, and 581). Besides using sat/ or sachch as a name for God,
the words have also been used as adjectives for the Ultimate Reality

& & &&

 G &@

so —_ “

237

which is immutably true, transcending time and Space, beyond fife and
death, never old, forever new. In the opening line of Japu, he is described
as adi sachu, jugad/ sachu: hai bhi sachu, nanak hosi bhi sachu— True
(was He) in the (beginningless) beginning, in the beginning of the cosmic

902. According to Sikh cosmogony, the universe was created by the
Transcendent God out of Himself at His own pleasure, and in His own will,

has therefore a dual nature. It is sat (real and no illusion) because it was
created by the Real One, who is immanent in it while He wills it to fast:
api sati kia sabhu sati (He Himself is Truth and true is His creation) (GG,
284). At the same time it is not sat (immutable and ever-existent)
because its existence is contingent upon His Will. Thus, although the
universe of time and Space emanates from sati (the Ultimate Reality), it

because the created cannot know the creator. (karte ki miti na Janai kia)
(GG, 285); yet the agam (unapproachable) and the agochar (inaccessible
through the senses) can be comprehended through the Guru’s sabad
(instruction) (GG, 130). This is accomplished in two ways, One, the Guru
by opening the inner eyes of the seeker’s higher consciousness reveals to
him the Satya that permeates the entire creation, so that “Nanak’s
Master, who is beyond the world and beyond the revelations of scriptures,
becomes distinctly manifest” (GG, 397). Secondly, the seeker who
through meditation upon the sat internalized it himself becomes one with
sati (GG, 284). In Sikh theology this happens with God's grace. In fact,
sati (God) in grace reveais itself to the chosen one through the Guru, who
is already so chosen and becomes one with sati. The medium of

“The Guru, the bani, and Brahm are all the same and are realized through
the sabad (GG, 39). God’s nadar (grace) is sovereign, subject alone to
His raza (will). However, two circumstances can help the seeker to
deserve and receive it. One is meeting with the satiguru (True Guru) (GG,
33, 313), and the other is to know the jugati (method), which comprises

“cleansing the mind of the dirt of kur (falsehood) and Cultivating love of
sachch” (GG, 468),

238

503. This brings us to the existential level, where sati or sachch is an
ethical category which sustains dharma, the governing principle of the
world of time and space. It forms the basis of hukam (law), niau (justice)
and changiai (goodness). At the individual level, sachch as truthfulness is
the most desirable virtue. “Sachch (truth) ts supreme, yet sachu achar
(true living) ranks above it” (GG, 62), ‘

504. Sikhism is a humanitarian creed, In which theological is closely
related to the Sociological aspect. Sat (truth) is here not only an abstract
notion of Supreme Reality, but is also a practical principle of human
conduct. The ideal set for a Sikh is to become sachiar (truth-seeking
person), and the basic human problem, set forth in the opening stanza of
Guru Nanak’s Japu, is “How to become sachiar? How to demolish the wall
of kur (falsehood)?” And the solution suggested in the fine immediately
succeeding is “to conduct Oneself under His Aukam (Will) and raza
(pleasure)” (GG, 1}, In Practical terms, Guru Nanak instructs, “Test your

‘mind against the touchstone of truth: guided by Guru’s light, deal in the

merchandise of truth: be a gurmukhi (guru loving) so that you despise
kur and are in love with sach: loving sach; you shall be absorbed in sach
and shall find the jewel! of nam (satinafn) which lies (dormant) in your
own mind” (GG, 22). Guru Amar Das declares, “Honour and good name
arise out of true word: seeing sachu and speaking sachu, body and mind
acquire truth” (GG, 69).

505. That truthful living implies truthful actions (sachu karam, or sachi
Kar) and true discipline (sachu sanjam) at individual level is obvious, but
Sikhism being a congregation based faith the Gurus also emphasize need
for true company (sachi sangat or satsangat) (GG, 69, 586). Satsangat is
defined as “a school for learning virtue” (GG, 1316) and “a place where
the One (God’‘s) Name is solely talked” (GG, 72).

506. Sati or sachch is both the name given the Supreme Reality and the
supreme good to be realized spiritually as well as in individual and social
life. This many-splendoured truth is “the overlord of all, accessible only to
One whom He blesses” (GG, 922). It Is “the panacea for all ailments; it
flushes out the filth of sin” (GG, 468).

2

os & &

oVee eu

ow

ay wy Ww | @&

ww Ww

wee Ww es

239

Seva

507. SEVA, from Sanskrit rot sev (to serve,
or worship, is usually translated as ‘service’
relates to work paid for, but does not convey
is used in the Sikh tradition. The word seva
connotations; one, it means to serve, to atte
and the second, to worship, to ador
Traditionally in the Indian (Hindu) s
(of gods) has been the preserve of t

wait or attend upon, honour,
or ‘serving’ which commonly
the sense in which the term
has, in fact had two distinct
nd to, to render obedience to
e, to reverence, to pay homage to.
ociety, seva in the sense of worship
he high-caste Brahmans, while that in
ted to the lowest of the castes. In the
e€em to have merged together for the
alitarian meaning. Sikhism does not
nce no distinctive caste roles in it; and

t from His creatures, He pervades His

rvice rendered to humanity (i.e. God in

Sikh sense, the two connotations s
reasons: first, because of its eg
recognize caste distinctions, and he
second, God in Sikhism is not apar
Creation (GG, 1350). Therefore se

man) is indeed considered a form of worship. In fact, in Sikhism, no
worship is conceivable without seva (GG, 1013). The Sikh is forbidden
from serving anyone apart from God (‘Serve you the Lord alone: none
else must you serve’ ((GG, 490). However, this also means that
whomsoever we serve, we really serve our Lord through him. Therefore it
becomes incumbent upon the Sikh to render seva with the highest sense
of duty since thereby he or she Is worshipping the Lord. ,

508. Seva in Sikhism is imperative for Spiritual life. It is the highest
penance (GG, 423). It is a means to acquiring the highest merit. The Sikh
often prays to God for a chance to render seva. Says Guru Arjan, Nanak
V, “I beg to serve those who serve you (GG, 43)” and “IL, your servant,
beg for seva of your. people, which is available through good fortune alone
(GG, 802).” According to Guru Amar Das, “He who is turned towards the
Guru finds repose and joy in seva” (GG, 125),

509. Three varieties of S€va are sanctioned in the Sikh lore: that
rendered through the corporal instrument (tan), that through the mental
apparatus (man) and that through the material wherewithal! (dhan),

510. The first of them is considered to be the highest of ail and is
imperatively Prescribed for every Sikh. “Cursed are the hands and feet
that “ngage not in seva” (Bhai Gurdas, Varan, 27.1). In traditional Indian
society work involving corporal labour was considered jow and relegated
to the humblest castes. By sanctifying it as an honourable religious
240

practice, the Sikh Gurus established the dignity of labour, a concept then
almost unknown to the Indian society. Not only did the Gurus sanctify it;
they also institutionalized it, e.g. service in Guru ka Langar (the Guru’s
community kitchen) and serving the sangat (holy assembly) in other ways
such as by grinding corn for it, fanning it to soften the rigour of a hot day
and drawing water for it. “I beg of you, O, Merciful One, make me the
slave of your Slaves. . . Let me have the pleasure of fanning them,
drawing water for them, grinding corn for them and of washing their
feet,” prays Guru Arjan (GG, 518).

5i1. Seva through the mental apparatus (man) lies in contributing ones
talents—creative, communicative, managerial, etc.—to the corporate
welfare of the community and mankind in general. It also lies in sharing
the pain of others. Response to the pain of others is a sine qua non of the
membership of the brotherhood of man. That is why the Sikh prayer said
in unison ends with a supplication for the welfare of all. Seva of this kind
is motivated not by the attitude of compassion aione, but primarily to
discover practical avenues for serving God through man.

512. Seva through material means (dhan) or philanthropy (dan) was
particularly sought to be made non-personal. The offerings (kar bheta)
made to the Gurus and the dasvandh (tithe) contributed by the Sikhs
went straight into the common coffers of the community. Personal
philanthropy can be debasing for the receiver and ego-entrenching for the
giver, but self-effacing community service is ennobling. Seva must be so
carried out as to dissolve the ego and lead to self-transcendence, which is
the ability to acknowledge and respond to that which is other than
oneself. Seva must serve to indicate the way in which such transcendence
manifests in one’s responsiveness to the needs of others in an impersonal
way.

513. The Sikh is particularly enjoined upon to render seva to the poor.
“The poor man’s mouth is the depository of the Guru”, says the
Rahitnama of Chaupa Singh. The poor and the needy are, thus, treated as
legitimate recipients of dan (charity) and not the Brahman who had
traditionally reserved for himself this privilege. Even in serving the poor,
one serves not the individual concerned, but God Himself through him.
Even as one feeds the hungry, it has been the customary Sikh practice to
pray: “The grain, O God, is your own gift. Only the seva is mine which
please be gracious enough to accept.”

Bd
sf
4
© 8 6 G

314. In the Sikh way of life, seva is consi
householder (grihasthi), “That home in’ whi
God is served not. Such mansions must be |i
ghosts alone abide”, Says Kabir (GG, 1374). The Sikhs are al
be householders, and Séva their duty. In Sikh
renunciation is not with attachment, but with seva

i ordained to
thought, the polarity of

‘heart’
and dha, ‘to put’, meaning to put one’s heart and mind on something
Translated into English, belief trust, confidence and faith are the

of the
, it can be interpreted as

242

the ideas which were originally peculiar to Sramana thought. The
Mundaka Upanisad representative of the Sramanic impact treats the
entire heritage of old Vedic knowledge as lower and declares that
knowledge as higher (paravidya) which reveals the Indestructible
(Mundak. 1.1.5.). this higher knowledge which leads to Spiritual
emancipation is the object of sraddha. However, it must be noted here
that the nature and function of sraddha in these texts are relative to
ritualistic, theistic, dualistic and mnon-dualistic theologies. The
Bhagavadgita gives to this term a definitive meaning for subsequent
Brahmanical developments. According to the Bhagavadgita, faith
(sraddha) is a factor in mukti (111.31): those endowed with faith attain
wisdom, and those without faith perish (IV. 39-40): faith is directly
associated with devotion and adoration (VII. 21): among all the yogis one
endowed with faith is the best. This soteriological significance and
importance of sraddha is tacitly accepted in all the sects of the
Brahmanical tradition including Saivism, Saktism, Vaisnavism and the
yogic schools. In addition to God or goddess, the prescribed paths, and
the scripture, in these schools, the position of teacher or guru becomes
an increasingly important object of sraddha. The concept of sraddha
occupies an important place in the Sramanic traditions of Jainism and
Buddhism also.

519, The word sardha occurs in the Guru Granth Sahib at numerous
places. Often it is associated with other related theoiogical terms such as
prem, bhagati (bhakti), puja and seva (devotion, adoration and service,
respectively). The necessity of faith and confidence is tacitly accepted in
Sikhism and there is a general uniformity in its meaning throughout the
Sikh texts. Besides sardha we find other words, nihcha (nischaya), bisvas
and partiti (GG, 87, 284, 292, 877, 1270); these words may be translated
as ‘faith’, ‘belief’ and ‘confidence’. The word partiti (Skt. pratiti) can also
be translated as faith or belief. One has partiti when one has clear
apprehension of or insight into anything; it gives the sense of complete
understanding, ascertainment and conviction. By implication partiti means
credit, respect, trust, confirmation and acknowledgement. Partiti thus is a
synonym of shardha in Sikhism. It is a cardinal moral virtue and a
prerequisite of piety. The nature and function of shardha in Sikh religion
and the way of fife cannot be understood without recourse to Sikh

theology.

243

520, Devotion to God Proceeds from faith in God: faith in God is linked to
love for God: love for God manifests itself in adoration and service, It is,
therefore, appropriate to understand the concept of shardha in the
context of bhagti, prem, puja and seva. All these terms bear a
significance in Sikh teaching only when we consider their meaning in

Scripture. This being the collection of canonical texts of Sikhism, is the
third major object of faith in Sikhism, In this system shardha is directed
to God, Guru and the Granth.

521. Belief in God and love of God go together: the functional value of
loving and believing leads to the same purpose and would seem to be
equal. The devotee is Said to spread the bed made of shardha for his
Lord—hari hari sardha sej vichhai prabhu chhodi na sakai (GG, 836);
because of shardha fixed on his Beloved he cannot live even for a
moment—sardha lagi sangi pritamai iku tify rahanu na jai (GG, 928). To
have faith in God means to have love for god, and vice versa, to have
love for god means to have falth in God.

522. As an ultimate commitment and supreme concern, shardha may be
summed up as concentration of belief in God. It has been Said that those
that have faith in Ram Nam, do not turn their thoughts to any thing efse——
Jin sardha ram nam lagi tin duja chitu na laia ram (GG, 444). The nature
of faith is unifying, which is also to Say, it is exclusive and undivided. One
cannot have faith in both Divinity and egoity, in God and not-God at the
Same time. Firm and Undivided faith leads to union with God. He who is
endowed with true faith is united to God—jin kai mani sacha bisvasu,
bekhi pekhi suami ki sobha anandu sada ulasy (GG, 677).

523. Occasionally this term is used in the sense of a wish or longing for
God. Thus when we read nanak ki prabh sardha puri, we have to
understand it in the sense that ‘God has fulfilled the desire of Nanak’ (GG,
893). Again, chit? avai ta sardha puri~when awareness (of God) comes
then the longing is satisfied (GG, 114). We can even Say that in these

244

usages. sardha is like mansa, thought, wish, longing, quest. God is the
object of love and object of faith and therefore the object of quest.

524. Although God is attainable through love and faith or loving faith, it
is clearly taught that one becomes faithful through God’s grace (hari
kirpa), faith in His name is inspired by Him—hari hari kripa karahu
jagjivan mai sardha nami lagavaigo (GG, 1310). -Faith in God comes
through faith in Guru who unites the seeker with the former— sardha
sardha upai milae mo kau hari gur guri nistare (GG, 983). God’s servants
are very good because they uphold Hari in their heart with faith, and Hari
is so good that He accepts the faith of His followers and upholds their
honour—prabh ke sevak bahutu ati nike mani sardha kari hari dhare,
mere prabhi sardha bhagati mani bhavai jan ki paij savare (GG, 982).
Those who with faith sing, listen, and cause others to listen (the glory of
God) and drink the Divine elixir (hari-ras), they are indeed fortunate—
gavat sunat, sunavat sardha hari rasu pi vadbhage (GG, 1306).

525. In addition to God, Guru and the Granth, a fourth field for the
cultivation of faith in Sikhism consists of the holy company (sadhsangat/)
of the devotees (sadh, sant). Faith rises in their company and one enjoys
the taste of the Divine essence through Guru's Ward—mili sangat sardha
upajai gur sabdi hari rasu chakhu (GG, 997). Happiness (sukh), peace
and longing (sardha) all these are attained with the help of the holy —
sukh sital sardha sabh piri hoe sant sahai (GG, 1000). The Scripture lays
down that the dust of the feet of those sages should be kissed with love
and confidence who have given their lives for the sake of God—Jjin hari
arathi sariru lagaia gur sadhu bahu saradha lai mukhi dhura (GG, 698).
The sages found Hari through faith; they found Hari through the word of
the Teacher. That is to say, faith in the Teacher’s word is the door to God-
realization. The word gurmukh literally means ‘Teacher’s: mouth’; it
symbolically means the word (sabda) or speech (bani) which comes out of
Guru's mouth. This word er speech documented in the Granth is an object
of faith because it is the vehicle to go beyond sansara. The gurmukh or
Teacher's word is therefore called the door of deliverance (mokhu-duar).
As is well known, the word gurmukh also means a pious person imbued
with faith, who has turned towards God or the Guru, a God-faced person.
As such, the gurmukh is the ideal person of Sikh culture and, therefore,
an embodiment of shardha, faith.

Sikh

245

—~

1

526. SIKH. The word sikh goes back to Sanskrit sisya, meaning a learner
Or disciple. In Pali, sisya became Sissa, The Pali word sekha (also Sekkha)
means a pupil or one under training if a religious doctrine (Sikeha;-siksa),

njab and

The Punjabi form of the word Was sikh. The term Sikh jin the Pu
elsewhere came to be used for the “isciples of Guru ‘Nanak (1469-1
and his nine spiritual successors. Nanakpanthis (lit. followers of the path
of Nanak) was also the term employed, especially in the ‘initial Stages,
Mobid Zulfigar Ardastani, a contemporary of Gury Hargobind (1595-1664)
and Guru Har Rai (1630-61) defines Sikhs in his Persian work Dabistan-j-
Mazahib as “Nanakpanthis better known as Guru-Sikhs (who) do not
believe in idols and temples,” According to the Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925,
Passed by the Punjab legislature, “Sikh means a Person who professes

the Sikh religion,” The Act further Provides that in case of doubt a person

Granth Sahib and the Ten Gurus, it requires a Sikh to affirm that he
follows their teachings. The latter Act thus excludes Sahajdharis
(graduatists who profess faith in Sikhism but have not yet complied with
the injunction about unshorn hair),

Nanak IV, adjures a Sikh to rise early in the morning, make his ablutions,
recite gurbani, the holy hymns, and not only himself remember God while
performing his normal duties but also assist others to do likewise. Guru
Tegh Bahadur, Nanak IX, defines the ideal man as one who frightens no
one, nor submits to fear himself. Sikhs are generally householders. There
is no priestly class among them. All on condition of fitness can perform

the priestly function. Women among them enjoy equal rights.

528. Although a person born and brought up ina Sikh family is generally
accepted as a Sikh, yet, strictly speaking, initiation through a specified
ceremony is essential. Up to the creation of the Khalsa by Guru Gobind
Singh in 1699, initiation through charan pahul was in vogue. According to
it, the novice was required to drink water touched by or poured over the
Guru's toe. Guru Gobind Singh introduced khande da amrit or rites of the
double-edged sword and prescribed the wearing of five symbols including
kesa or unshorn hair, which form is obligatory for all Sikhs. Exemption,
that also temporary, is claimed by Sahajdhari Sikhs.

Sikh Cosmology

529, SIKH COSMOLOGY. From the very beginning man has been
curious to Know about the structure and constitution of the Universe and
! its origin. To locate the stable base of this universe and to. fix his own
place in it have been the subjects of his constant search and speculation
for him. The Gurus brought their own mystical and philosophical powers
to solving the riddle. In their poetry in the Guru Granth Sahib, they have
expressed their sense of wonder and sung paeans of praise for the
| Almighty. A minute observation of the phenomenon of nature forms an
important part of the Sikh metaphysical insight. It brings into view a
palpable vision of the Creator and His creation. The medium used is
poetry of far-reaching import. It is at the same time poetry of elemental

beauty as well as of grandeur.

|

| 530. The Gurus have unequivocally and forcefully stressed the unicity of
| the Godhead. There is no reom in it for any dualistic or polytheistic
| doctrines. The deities of the Hindu mythology, for instance, have no place
| in their belief as the objects of worship; nor was anyone of them regarded
| co-eternal with God. The matter out of which forms are shaped and the
| selves that inhabit them are eternal in Him but not with Him. Again, the
God of Sikh teaching is not a mere concept or principle; He is the Ultimate
Reality. True and eternal, He is the Power that has existed forever and
disappear.

material as well as efficient cause, Says Guru Nanak, “ tun karta Purakhu
agammu hai ape sristi Upati—You are the creator, unknowable: you have
yourself created the world” (GG, 138). There was a time when the world
had not yet appeared and there will be a time when the world will again

532. The Gurus have called the Pré-creation state sunya, meaning
‘empty void’, ‘negative abyss,’ ‘nothingness,’ Describing this stage, Guru
Nanak says:- ,

For countless ages utter darkness Prevailed
There was neither earth nor heaven,

The will of the Infinite Lord reigned everywhere.
There was neither day nor night, -

Nor sun nor moon,

Only Sunya (the Absolute Self) stayed in solitary meditation,
(GG, 1035)

Again,

Fora good many ages

Utter darkness filled everywhere,

T he Creator was wholly absorbed in deep meditation.
There existed only His true nam, His glory,

And the lustre of His eternal throne. (GG, 1023)

Says Guru Arjan, “kai bar Pasario pasar sada Sada ik
akankar—Many a time you have Projected this creation, yet you always
remained the only formless One” (GG, 276),
248

.933.. Many schools of thought have put forth the view that the world was
born out. of nothingness. However, the Sunya-of the Gurus does not
correspond to the Buddhistic concept, ‘nor the absolute: nothingness, the
‘ex-nihilo’ of other schools. The “nothingness” of the Gurus refers to
absence of creation, and not to the absence of the Creator or His essence
or potency. The Gurus have used “Sunya” in conjunction with térmis like
samadhi, tari (trance, meditation) or sahaj (equipoise, balance) or sach
(holy truth). These terms describe the state of complete tranquillity and
oneness of the Absolute Self, and refer to that latent form in which every
aspect of creation lies dormant in Him, waiting for the operation of the
Divine urge for its unfoldment. With this urge, from apparent
nothingness, the Formless assumes form, “The unattributed becomes the

Attributed -“nirgun te sargunu thia” (GG, 940) and thus this world of a
myriad colours takes shape.

934, The Gurus do not subscribe to the view that the world suddenly
appeared in its finished form. It has passed through a gradual process of
evolution. They also reject the view that it has been ‘produced’ or
‘manufactured’ mechanically as an artisan, might produce an article out of
a given substance. God and His creation are one—the creation was
merged in Him. God raised the creation out of Himself. It is a gradual

unfoldment of what lay folded within the Ultimate cause—the Absolute
Self.

From the state of Sunya,

The latent form became active,

The elements of air and water

Were evolved out of Sunya. ..

Within the fire .

Water and living beings is His Light,

And the power of Creation lies within Sunya,..,
From Sunya came out the moon
The sun and the firmament. . .
The earth and heaven have been evolved out of Sunya.:

(GG, 1037-38)

536. The source and origin of Creation is Shabad, sabda, (sound), nam,
nad, bani or anahad sabad. The will of God (hukam) becomes
Synonymous with the word of God. Gury Nanak says, “kita pasau eko
kavau tis te hoe lakh dariau—With his Primal Word (kavao) originated
creation and millions of rivers were set flowing” (GG, 3). Guru Amar Das
Says “upati paraly sabade havyaj Sabade hij Phiri opati hovai—Through
sabad (word) creation and dissolution take place and through sabad
creation takes rebirth” (GG, 117).

Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. » + All things
were made by Him; and without Him was not made anything” (John, 1,1),
The poets of the nirguna school like Kabir and Dady also equate the sabad
(Word) with the Creator,

538. Sabad (sound manifested) Produces the subtle element akash
(ether), from which the other four subtle elements emerge, which in turn

what has Sprung from Him cannot be lifeless or inert. Guru Nanak says
“sache te Pavana bhaia pavane te Jalu hoi—From the eternal being air

250

evolved and from air water” (GG, 19). Lifeless matter can neither respond
to outer and inner influences, nor can it be translated into an evolutionary
process. There is no such thing as pure matter in the entire universe. —

540. Forms may be with or without a self or soul. The ensouled forms
have been called jivas. In and through them the conscious luminous
spirit, a spark of the Divine Flame, gains vital expression. While jivas
have been divided into four broad categories (khanis)—egg-born, womb-
born, earth-born and sweat-born—references are also made to the gods,
ghosts and the like. Guru Nanak says, “Innumerable are the categories of
creation in various colours and forms.” Creation cannot be limited to any
fixed number of categories.

541, The Gurus have given vivid accounts of the visible and invisible
worlds. They refer to countless kinds of creation. They speak of
innumerable mountains, oceans, countries, continents, galaxies and
universes. Guru Nanak’s composition ‘japu” which is considered to be the
epitome of the entire Sikh philosophy, gives a highly imaginative account
of the gross and subtle worlds in the stanzas known as “khands”
(regions). Metaphorical references to the three worlds (tribhavan), the
nine divisions (Nav khand), the fourteen régions (chaudah bhavan or lok)
of Hindu and Muslim belief are also referred to, but the Gurus repeatedly
' say that like the Lord, His creation is also limitless. Says the Guru,
“Without limit is creation, without measure. Millions long to find the limit,
but limitless is creation.” Again, “Countless are the atmospheres, waters
and fires; countless the clouds, the moons and the suns, infinite are the
spheres, infinite the space.” The Gurus believe that there are many solar
systems like that of ours and each solar system has its own Brahma,
Visnu and Mahesa (gods of creation, sustenance and dissolution). So
great is the lord and so boundless in His creation that countless planets
and worlds are being created and dissolved in it in the twinkling of an

eye.

542, Time and space are two very significant factors in the process of
creation. The whole creation Is under their influence and sway. It is,
therefore, subject to growth and decay. Only the Creator, the
Transcendental One, is beyond the influence of time and space. Guru
Nanak calis Him akal murati, “you transcend time, time has no effect on
you—tu akal purakhu nahi siri kala” (GG, 1038). In fact time and space
exist only as part of the creation. Not only is creation in time and space, it
can only be understood in relation to them. When creation itself dissolves

%.
b.

251

at the time of Pralaya (dissolution), time and space also merge into

Eternity, Therefore, the Gurus do not accept the independent existence of
time and space.

Only the Supreme Being is eternal, (GG, 276)

544. In Gurbani, temporality and eternity are constant opposites, Time

created the universe, the continents, regions, dnd the nether worlds, And
the unmanifest made himself manifest.”

545, Sikh cosmology maintains the fourfold division of time, Time is
divisible into four yugas. The computation of time is in accordance with
the Bikrami era, which precedes the Christian era by 57 years.
Occasionally the kaji Yuga era too is mentioned. In the sum, for most

546. The Gurus regard man as the crown of creation. Unique fs the
structure of his body which is “the temple of the living God—Aeri Mandaru
ehu sariru hai... ” (GG, 1346). It Is in this worthy temple that the
Creator is to be realized and worshipped. Guru Amar Das says:

In the body are contained,
Pearls and treasures,

The storehouse of devotion.
The nine regions of the earth,

Shops and Markets

252

And the nine treasures of nam, the divine
Are contained in this frame. (GG, 754)

547. _The human body is the model of the whole creation, We, each one
of us, are the complete universe. Man is the microcosm of the cosmos
which is the macrocosm. The study of this macrocosm can reveal all the
secrets contained in the macrocosm. Our body is the epitome of all
creation and we have only to turn within to seek the truth. There is a
complete parallel system between the physicai processes of the universe
and the biotogical processes in the body of man. Above and beyond the
nine visible ‘gates’ (eyes, ears, nostrils, mouth and the two lower
apertures) of the body there lies the invisible “tenth door” (dasam duar)
where the true sabda, in all its resplendent glory and bliss, keeps
ceaselessly resounding. This unstruck music (akhand sabad), the stream
of perennial life, the true Nectar is incessantly in operation in the “tenth
door” from where man can travel back to his true Home (sach khand) on

‘the ship of the Word (sabda). He can then merge his individual self in the

Universal self to obtain lasting release from the cycle of birth and death.
In fact, the human body is a precious gift, the golden Opportunity which
the great Lord mercifully grants to creation,so that it may realize its true
self and become one with the transcendent. To utilize the body for this
purpose is the real goal and end of life, and the only justification for
man’s sojourn in this world.

548. The concept of cosmology advanced by the Gurus is not merely
theological or speculative. It is the outcome of their own spiritual and
mystical experience. The Gurus were unmatched spiritual teachers who in
their own spiritual ascent beheld the splendid vision of the entire creation.
They described what they themselves saw vividly revealed within (GG,
894). Their personal mystical experience is the real base and authority of
their revelation. They established a living communion with God and
possessed first-hand experience of all the secrets of creation. However, in
their humility the Gurus time and again have proclaimed that the mystery
of creation is known to the Creator alone, Unlike those creeds which have
set dates for the origin of creation, the Gurus have visioned it as wrapped
in the mystery and infinity of the Creator. As stated in the Japu, none can
claim knowledge of this mystery which the Creator alone beholds.

we Nar

wr

253

Sikhism and Caste System

Sikhism, and his nine Spiritual successors strongly attacked the system.
The advent of Sikhism in the midst of caste rigidities and superstitions
was truly a radical beginning.

550. Caste, lexically defined as “a hereditary social group comprising
Persons of the same ethnic stock, sociai rank, occupation and more or
less distinctive mores” is a characteristic common to all societies the
world over, and hardly shows anything more than social differentiations
that have developed in varying degrees of discrimination or
exclusiveness. In the Punjab, for instance, caste Gat or zat) signifies only
an ethnic group gotra (family, line, sept or class) just like the
MacDonalds, Montagues, Montmorencies, etc, in England, It is only when
it develops into a system with its rigid sttatification and permanent

division of social status based on birth alone, as it did in India, that caste
becomes a curse,

551. A system is qualitatively different from a casual or unintentional
assortment of factors or forces. it is what distinguishes philosophy,
religion or science from an unintegrated mass of doctrines and tenets, It
is what distinguishes an army from a rabble, as it involves organization,
arrangement, method and considered principles of procedure. Above all, a

Oriented, coordinated and harmonized. Moreover, a system has its own
cumulative Power, thrust, momentum not easy to stem, and grip, hold
and shackle almost impossible to unfetter. The caste system that
developed in India over the millennia possessed all these ingredients and
characteristics. And more, it was given the garb of religion, the
Varnasrma Dharma, signifying divine origin or sanction for it.

552. That social distinctions existed, as in other primitive societies, in
Pre-Aryan India is evidenced by the ruins of the Indus Valley civilization,
but whether these were characterized by permanent divisions based on
birth we do not know. The caste system in the Hindu society as generally
understood definitely developed after the advent of the Aryans. Whether

254

a four-fold division into occupational groups was historical necessity for
the invaders is irrelevant here.. The fact is that among the sacerdotal
groups, the Brahmans, came to possess real power in matters social as
well as religious and became, besides being the sole interpreters of
religious texts, exclusive authors and arbiters of the social code. They
divided society into castes and sub-castes meticulously arranged in a
hierarchical social pyramid in which the social grade of each group and
individual was fixed permanently by birth. Each layer in the pyramid was
superior in caste status (virtually in social status) to all the layers below
it, and lower in caste status to all the others above it, irrespective of their
political power and economic position. Even the Brahmans at the top of
the pyramid and the untouchables at its bottom were graded among their
own ranks. The privileges, disabilities, obligations, and duties, i.e.
practically all aspects of social behaviour, of each sub-caste by fixed rules
and codes were formulated by Brahmans particularly by Manu who
claimed direct descent from Brahma, the creator of universe. These sub-
castes were, by and large, endogamous groups, and they worked
sedulously to isolate themselves from each other in other social matters
too. Mutual exclusiveness was caused predominantly not by social, but by
ritualistic factors. Such factors as personal endowments, wealth, political
power, colour and racial prejudices, and evén taboos, which determined
the hierarchical set-ups in other societies, were not the final determinants
in the Indian caste system, though these did contribute to its
development. Although individuals, groups and sub-castes were in the
grip of a continuously downward process, there was practicaily no upward
social mobility.

553. Caste system of the Varnasrama had its own intricacies. Its
constituents were interdependent and interlocked, both horizontally and
vertically, in a self-perpetuating social fabric. Within the sub-caste, each
constituent of the system (hereditary functionalism, social and ritualistic
taboos, pollution, religion, etc.) tied its own caste-knot around the
individual.

554. The fundamental assumption of the caste ideology is that men are
not equal, ‘but are forever unequal. Permanent human inequality is the
officially declared Brahmanical ideology, and this forms the basis of the
Hindu social order. God Himself is the author of this inequality. The Veda
was declared by Manu to be the direct revelation of God, and it is a Rig
Vedic hymn, Purusa Sukta, which forms the source for the caste ideology.
It says that God created Brahmans from His head, Ksatriyas from his
arms, Vaisyas from His legs and Sudras from His feet. Even the Dharma

= wae

we eeg ee

255

Sastra of Manu is said to be the inspired word of the Vedas, almost of
equal authority with them. Manu did not rest

divine authority of the Vedas, His object thereb

of @ Brahman is authoritative for ‘man’ b
foundation for that (Manu, XI. 85).

, “There is no
cut practical steps towards
@s) on independent ideological

Meaningless is caste and meaningless (caste) names,
The same shadow Protects all beings (GG, 83)

What can caste do?

Truthfulness is the criterion (GG, 142),

Discern the light; do not enquire (one’s) caste;

There is no caste in the hereafter (GG, 349)

Do not enquire about (one’s) caste and birth

Preach the True Sastra .

Caste and honour are determined by deeds (GG, 1330).
About high and low caste, he declared:
There are lower castes among the low castes,
And some are absolutely low:
Nanak seeketh their company,
What hath he to do with the high ones? (GG, 15)

Reading of Vedas he described as a mundane function which
Brahmans perform (GG, 791).

Elsewhere he says,

256

Vedas talk about virtue and sin

Or about heaven and hell, nothing else;
But the soul know that

As one soweth, so one reapeth (GG, 1243).

556. And he castigated Brahmans as “immersed in doubt, they never find
the goal, although they call themselves teachers, savants and priests”
(GG, 905); and “The Pandit cannot reach (the goal) simply by studying;
involved in the duel of sin and virtue he only quenches Death’s hunger,”
(GG, 1012). Other Gurus who succeeded Guru Nanak also spoke and
preached in the same vein.

557. By contradicting Hinduism, Sikhism also delinked itself from, that
aspect of Hindu dharma which was, in day-to-day action, the main vehicle
for providing religious sanction to the varnasrama dharma. The Gurus
issued their own new version of dharma, which was, at least as far as
caste was concerned, completely at variance with the Hindu mores. They
made the Dharma perfect and universal by biending the four castes into
one. Underlying the taboos on food and drink and the ostracization of the
Sudra castes was the notion of pollution which was supposed to be
incurred not only by partaking of food or drinks under certain conditions,
but by the mere bodily contact with persons of certain low castes whose
traditional occupation, whether actually followed or not, rendered them
untouchable. This hymn by Guru Nanak speaks clearly:-

If idea of impurity be admitted, there is impurity in
everything

There are worms in cow-dung and in wood;
There is no grain of corn without life,

In the first place, there is life in water

By which everything is made green.

How can impurity be avoided?

It enters our very kitchens.

Impurity is not washed away thus, O Nanak;

it is washed by divine knowledge. . .

eeu ®@

we

ww @& Y& w&

257

All impurity supposedly contagious

Consists in superstition. , ,

Those who have, through the Guru, understood

Suffer no contamination (GG. 472),

558. Besides denying the authority of the Vedas and Sastras, the Guru
took some practical steps to impart an egalitarian thrust to the nascent
Sikh community. The twin institutions of sangat (company of the holy)
and pangat (commensality), where no discrimination on the basis of
caste, birth or social status was observed, went a long way in inculcating
in the Sikhs the spirit of equality, brotherhood and humanitarianism. The
creation of the Khalsa by Guru Gobind Singh was the acme of the Sikh
movement. The Khalsa made a clear break with the caste society. Of the
five original initiates, the first batch of entrants to the Khalsa
Brotherhood, there were three from the so-called Sudra castes, and one
Jat, a caste then on the borderline of Vaisyas and Sudras. For initiation
into the Khalsa ranks, ritual (amrit or khande di pahul) was made
obligatory (Guru Gobind Singh himself had to undergo), and during the
ceremony the neophytes had to take five vows, viz. dharm nash, i.e. to
sever connection with one’s previous religious belief, keram nash, i.e. to
free oneself from former rites, rituals, customs, etc.; ku/ nash, i.e,
severance of ali ties with lineage and birth, the fundamental basis of caste
society; shram nash, i.e. obliteration of stigmas attached to trade or
occupation, which gave the convert a sense of self-respect and dignity of
labour; and bharm nash, i.e. discarding superstition, taboos and notion of
pollution. The later Sikh literature of the 18% century (the Rahitnamas,
specifically of varied authorship and composed at different times carrying
the different emphases) is agreed on the point that the Khalsa broke
away categorically from the caste ideology and caste society. Testimony
from contemporary non-Sikh sources substantiates this fact and historical
evidence supports it. Guru Gobind Singh assigned the overall military
command to a former Bairagi assisted by a council of five, selected
irrespective of their former castes, Later, of the five divisions of Sikh
guerrillas, one was captained by a convert from the so-called untouchable
Scavenger caste while another was headed by a former Ksatriya. Still

_ later, when with further expansion of the Sikh army, the Dal Khalsa, it

was divided into eleven misis, one was commanded by a low-caste

warrior. Likewise, the overall command vested with one not born to the
caste,

258

559. Sikhism mounted a frontal attack on citadel of caste and the
individual pillars on which it was based. It must, however, be admitted
that caste could not be totally uprooted, so strongly was it entrenched in
the Indian soil, although it must be emphasized at the same time that the
Sikhs never accepted either the religious validity of the caste system or
that of its constituent pillars, its authors, interpreters and upholders, the
Brahmans. The Sikhs have never owed allegiance to any scripture but
Guru Granth Sahib, and it completely and categorically repudiates caste
distinctions, ritualism and the Brahmanical Ideology of pollution. Nor,
since the time of the creation of the Khalsa, Brahmans have ever become
a point of reference in the Sikh society in regard to social status or
hierarchy, or for that matter for any purpose whatsoever. There has been
no sacerdotal class or caste among the Sikhs, and stress on work ethics
has amalgamated the other three castes into a single working class.

560. Guru Nanak says, “Do not ever bow at the feet of those who claim
to be gurus and spiritual guides but go begging at others’ doors for
subsistence. He has recognized the (true) path, O Nanak! Who earns his
living through hard labour and gives something to help others” (GG,
1245). Whatever traces of caste are still discernible among the Sikhs
constitute a lingering and fast-dying aberration and not the rule. It must
be borne in mind that there is vital distinction between caste and caste
system—caste in the ordinary lexical sense and the term caste in the
Brahmanical sense. Jatts and Khatris among the Sikhs are in reality
occupational classes and not castes as under the Varnasrama Dharma.
They do not constitute an hierarchy, because hierarchy presupposes
demarcation of higher and lower grades, which are absent from the Sikh
society. Distinctions wherever noticed are not ethnic but economic. Jatt
Sikhs traditionally forming the peasantry, by and large, continue to stick
to.land and constitute bulk of the rural segment of population, while
Khatri and Arora Sikhs being traditionally engaged in trade and commerce
are largely located in urban areas. There is however no bar to
occupational mobility.

561. The only case where some vestiges of the caste system still remain
is that of social discrimination against Mazhabi Sikhs (converts from
scavenging caste) and Ramdasia Sikhs (formerly Chamars engaged in
leather work and weavers). They too have never been treated as
untouchable and there has been no commensal or social discrimination
against those among them who have taken the pahu/ (the rites) of the
Khalsa. Also, there has been no discrimination against anyone while
attending religious gatherings or dining in Guru ka Langar, i.e. community

. oF

ial

259

kitchen. The existence of remaining prejudices may be explained by
several factors. First, it is a part of the dynamics of ideological mass

reached a plateau and then slided somewhat back towards the levels they
started from. It is due to the limitation of human nature and

revolutionary Sikh movement, it must be appreciated, attracted to its foid
a large number of converts, mostly from the Hindu caste society,

562, During the tribulations and turmoils of the eighteenth century, the

core elements of the Khalsa were deeply involved in a life-and death

563. Intra-caste endogamy is practised only by some Khatri and Arora
caste groups. In most Cases, and invariably in the case of Jatt Sikhs,
Marriage is exogamous in relation to sub-caste, though endogamous in
relation to class. In India, marriages are not based on pre-marital love, as
in the West, and divorce is most difficult to obtain, if not Practically

260

within the family, introduced in India by the Semitic tradition, has not
been acceptable to Indian culture, which considers marriage between
cousins as incestuous. Hence the vogue of treating marriage within zat
(caste or class) as endogamous, but in relation to gotra (sub-caste, sept
or clan) as exogamous.

Singh

564, SINGH, from Sanskrit sinha for lion, is an essential component of
the name for a Sikh male. Every Sikh male name must end with ‘Singh’.
Historically, this was so ordained by Guru Gobind Singh on the Balsakhi
day, 30 March 1699, when he inaugurated the Khalsa, introducing a new
form of initiatory rites, khande di pahul. The five Sikhs who from among
the assembly had on that day offered their heads one after the other
responding to the Guru’s successive calls were the first Sikhs who were
administered by him the vows of the Khalsa. They were to adopt the five
prescribed emblems, including kesa or unshorn hair and share a common
end-name ‘Singh’ in token of having joined the self-abnegating, martial
and casteless fellowship of the Khalsa. After initiation, Daya Ram had
become Daya Singh, Dharam Das Dharam Singh, Muhkam Chand
Muhkam Singh, Himmat Rai Himmat Singh and Sahib Chand Sahib Singh.
Guru Gobind Singh, who had himself initiated at the hands of these five,
received the name of Gobind Singh.

565. Every male Sikh has since carried ‘Singh’ as part of his name. This
was a way of inculcating among the Sikhs a spirit of brotherhood as well
as of valour. Wearing the distinctive symbols and clad and armed like a
soldier with a flowing beard and a neatly tied turban on his head, a Singh
had been set high ideals to live up to. As subsequent events proved,
Singhs became a strong cohesive force admired even by their enemies for
their qualities of courage and chivalry. For example, Qazi Nur Muhammad,
who came in Ahmad Shah Durrani’s train during his seventh invasion of
India (1764-65), in his poetic account of the campaign in Persian, refers
to, the Singhs in rude and imprecatory language, but cannot at the same
time help proclaim their many virtues. In section XLI of his poem, he
says: “Singh is a title (a form of address for them). It is not just to call
them ‘dogs’ (his contumelious term for Singhs). If you do not know the
Hindustani language, (I shall tell you that) the word Singh means a lion.
Truly, they are like lions in battle and, in times of peace, they surpass
Hatim (in generosity)... Leaving aside their mode of fighting, hear ye
another point in which they excel all other fighting people. In no case
would they slay a coward, nor would they put an obstacle in the way of a

88 @

ae @

eo &

uo

ww

ww

a od

= ww «Ww 8

~~ ee

261

fugitive. They do not plunder the ornaments of a woman... They do not
make friends with adulterers and housebreakers."

266, As a rule, all Sikhs other than Sahajdharis are named Singhs even
before the formal initiation through khande di pahul takes place. While
‘Sikh’ is a spiritual appellation, ‘Singh’ has socio-political overtones in
addition. In practice all Singhs are Sikhs with the discipline enjoined upon
them by Guru Gobind Singh added. In sentiment, however, they are
closer to the community as a whole and more active socially and
politically, Their special status is recognized legally as well. Under the
Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925, and the Delhi Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1971, while
all adult Sikhs are eligible to be registered as voters for election to the
respective Gurdwara Parbandhak Committees, only amritdhari Sikhs, ie.
Singhs, are qualified for the membership of these statutory bodies.
Similarly Sikh rahit Maryada or code of conduct published by the
Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee makes a distinction between
shakhsi rahini or individual conduct and panthic rahini or corporate
conduct. While the former applies to all Sikhs, the Singhs must conduct
themselves, in addition, according to the banthic rahini.

Siropa

567. SIROPA, a term adopted from Persian Sar-0-pa (head and foot) or
Sarapa (head to foot) meaning an honorary dress, is used in Sikh
vocabulary for a garment, scarf or a length of cloth bestowed on someone
as a mark of honour. It is equivalent of Khill’at or robe of honour with the
difference that while a khill’at is awarded by a political superior and
comprises a whole set of garments with or without arms, a siropa is
bestowed by a religious or social figure or institution and may comprise a
whole dress or, as is usually the case, a single garment or a length of
cloth as a mark of recognition of piety or as an acknowledgement of
unswerving devotion to a moral or philanthropic purpose.

568. The use of the term may be traced to certain hymns of the Gurus
where the exact words used are kapra (garment or cloth), patola (scarf)
and sirpau (saropa, dress of honour), and they signify the bestowal of
honour as well as protection of honour. For example, Guru Nanak sang,
sachi sifat salah kapra paia—I received by His grace the garment
signalling me to sing His praise (GG, 150). And Guru Arjan said, prem
Patola tai sahi dita dhakan key pati meri—O Lord, thou hast invested me
with the scarf of love to save my honour (GG, 520). In another hymn he
Sang, suni pukar samarth suami bandhan kati savare/pahiri sirpau sevak
Jan mele nanak pragat pahare—Responding to my humble plaint the all-

262

powerful Lord has cut asunder all of our shackles. Upon his servants he
has conferred robes of honour (GG, 31). Yet in another place: bhagat jana
ka lugara odhi nagan na hoi/ sakat sirpau resmi pahirat pati khoi—
devotees of God are not naked even in torn rag. One who Is attached to
maya loses his honour clad even in his silk robes (GG, 811).

569. Siropa should be distinguished from the bestowal of a turban or
gown by a saint upon a disciple as a mark of initiation or confirmation in
an order or of succession to its headship. Sfropa among the Sikhs is a
symbo! of honour or benediction. The practice can be traced back at least
as far as Guru Angad who bestowed upon (Guru) Amar Das a scarf every

year. The latter treated these scarfs as sacred gifts and carried them tied
on his head one above the other.

570. The siropa is now a gift bestowed by sangat on behalf of the Guru
Granth Sahib upon someone who deserves the honour by virtue of his or
her dedication. It is almost invariably in the form of a fength of cloth, two
to two-and-a-half metres, usually dyed in saffron colour, accompanied by
prasad, the consecrated food which could be in the form of karah prasad,
sugar crystal or bubbles, or dry fruit. Siropa is the highest award that a
Sikh may receive in sangat. It is the most precious gift of the Guru made
through the sangat. The present practice of giving a siropa to anyone who
makes an offering of or exceeding a certain value or who happens to be
socially or politically important is, strictly speaking, an aberration. S/ropa
is earned through high merit and dedication.

263

Chapter 4
SRI GURU GRANTH SAHIB
ahi eV ny GRANTH SAHIB

1, SRI GURU GRANTH SAHIB (Guru = Spiritual teacher; Granth =
book or volume; Sahib, an honorific signifying master or lord) is the name
by which the holy book of the Sikhs is commonly known. It is a

by Guru Arjan (1563-1606), Nanak Vv. It was in the beginning referred to
as pothi, pothi sahib, the revered book. It was treated with great
veneration. The Guru himself described the pothi “as God’s own
repository” (GG, 1226). It was also called the Granth Sahib. The prefix
“Guru” came to be applied as Guru Gobind Singh ended, before his
Passing, the line of personal Gurus. “Granth Sahib” was designated as
“Guru Granth Sahib.” The Guru had declared the Word to be the same as
Guru (GG, 943). Guru Amar Das, Nanak III, had announced that for the
sake of liberation, contemplation of the Word was more efficacious than
even the sight of the Guru (GG, 594). Over the years, the holy book has
received the honours due to the living Gurus. No Sikh assembly can
Properly speaking be so named unless the holy book be present in it. The
holy volume in wraps or without wraps, which is but a rare occurrence,
wherever located commands the reverence that was shown the living
Gurus. The Holy Book is the centre of all Sikh usage and ceremony.

2. The Guru Granth Sahib—some of the vartations on the title being
Adi Granth, Sri Adi Granth or Adi Sri Guru Granth Sahib—is today the
living Guru for the Sikhs, The basic Word in the expressions listed is
granth which means a book, Sahib and Sri being honorifics, guru
indicating its status as successor in the Guruship and adi, literally,
original, first or Primary, distinguishing it from the other sacred book of
the Sikhs, the Dasam Granth, the book of the tenth Master, which
contains the compositions of the Tenth (Dasam) Guru. 4 simpler form
with a clear rural voice is Darbar Sahib, the holy court. The contributors
to the Gury Granth Sahib came from a variety of class and creedal

background—there were among them Hindus as also Muslims, “low”
castes as also “high” castes.

264

3, There were as many different contributors as there were rhymes
and rhythms. The entire text was cast in verse patterns of a wide variety.
There were 31 different measures used. They were all set in padas
(verses), astpadis (8- stanza hymns) and chhants (lyrics usually of 4
stanzas each) and longer compositions such as vars in the order of the
succession of the authors. In the 1430-page recension which is now the
standard form and which carries the statutory approval of the Shiromani
Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee in the present-day Sikh complex the
sequence of contents is: the liturgical part (1-13), Siri Raga (14-93), Majh
(94-150), Gauri (151-346), Asa (347-488), Gujari (489-526),
Devagandhari (527-536), Bihagara (537-556), Vadahansa (557-594),
Sorathi (595-659), Dhanasari (660-695), Jaitsari (696-710), Todi (711-
718), Bairai (719-720), Tilang (721-727), Suhi (728-794), Bilaval (795-
858), Gaund (859-875), Ramkali (876-974), Nat Narain (975-983), Mali
Gaura (984-988), Maru (989-1106), Tukhari (1107-1117), Kedara (1118-
1124), Bhairau (1125-1167), Basant (1168-1196), Sarang (1197-1253),
Malar (1254-1293), Kanara (1294-1318), Kalian (1319-1326), Prabhati
(1327-1351), Jaijavantl (1352-1353), Salok Sahaskriti (1353-1360),
Gatha, Phuneh and Chaubole (1360-1364), Salok Kabir (1364-1377),
Salok Farid (1377-1384), Savaiyye (1385-1409), additional sa/ok (1410-
1429), Mundavani, and Ragmala (1429-1430).

‘4, Even before the time of Guru Arjan, pothis or books, in Gurmukhi
characters existed containing the holy utterances of the Gurus. A line in
Bhai Gurdas, var !.32, suggests that Guru Nanak during his travels carried
under his arm a book, evidently comprising his own compositions.
According to the Puratan Janam Sakhi he handed over such a manuscript
to Guru Angad as he passed on the spiritual office to him. Two of the
collections of hymns or pothis prior to the Guru Granth Sahib are still
extant. They are in the possession of the descendants of Guru Amar Das.
One of the families in the line used to live in Patiala and has only recently
migrated to Pinjore, in the Sivaliks, and the pothi it has inherited is on
view for the devotees in their home on the morning of the full-moon day
every month. A collateral family which is in possession of the second pothi
lives in the village of Darapur, in Hoshiarpur district of the Punjab.

5. The bani, or word revealed, was held in great veneration by the
Sikhs even before the Holy Volume was compiled. it was equated with the
Guru himself. “The bani is the Guru and the Guru bani,” says Guru Ram
Das in Raga Nat Narain (GG, 982). The bani echoed the Divine Truth; it
265

was the voice of God—“the Lord’s own word,” as said Guru Nanak in the
Guru Granth Sahib. Guru Amar Das (GG, 515):-

vahu, vahu, bani nirankar hai
tis Jjevad avar na koe

Hail, hail, the word of the Guru, which is the Lord. Formless
Himself:

There is none other, nothing else to be reckoned equai to it.

6. The compilation of the Holy Book, a momentous event in Sikh
history, is generally described in the briefest terms. The Sacred Volume
Was prepared by Guru Arjan (1563-1606) and the first copy was
calligraphed by Bhai Gurdas (1551-1636) at his dictatfion—this is all we
learn from most of the sources. What amount of planning, minute
attention to detail and diligent and meticulous work it involved is slurred
over. An old text which gives some detailed information is the Gurbilas
Chhevin Patshahi, Written in 1718, this, in fact, is the oldest source.
Although it does not go into the technical and literary minutiae, it broadly
describes the process from the beginning of the transcription of the Holy
Volume to its installation in the newly-built Harimandar at Amritsar.

7. Why Guru Arjan undertook the task is variously explained. One
‘commonly accepted assumption is that the codification of the Gurus’
compositions into an authorized volume was begun by him with a view to
preserving them from garbling by schismatic groups and others.
According to the Mahima Prakash (1776), he set to work with the
anncuncement: “As the Panth (Community) has been revealed unto the
world, so there must be the Granth (Book), too.” By accumulating the
canon, Guru Arjan wished to affix the seal on the sacred Word. It was also
to be the perennial fountain of inspiration and the means of self-
perpetuation for the community.

8. Guru Arjan called Bhai Gurdas to his presence and expressed to him
the wish that the sacred verse be collected. Messages were sent to the
disciples to gather and transmit to him the hymns of his predecessors.

9. Baba Mohan, son of Guru Amar Das, Nanak III, had manuscript
collections of the Gurus’ hymns inherited from his father. Bhai Gurdas
travelled to Goindval to bring these Pothis, but the owner refused to see
him. Bhai Buddha, one of the oldest and most revered Sikhs from Guru
266

Nanak’s days, was similarly turned away from the door. Then Guru Arjan
went himself. He sat in the street below Mohan’s attic serenading him on
his fambura. Mohan was disarmed to hear the hymn. He came downstairs
with the pothis and presented these to the Guru. As says the Gurbilas, the
pothis were placed on a palanquin bedecked with precious stones. The
Sikhs carried it on their shoulders and Guru Arjan walked behind barefoot.
He refused to ride his horse, saying that the pothis were the very spirit,
the very light of the four Gurus—his predecessors,

10. The cavalcade broke journey at Khadur Sahib to make obeisance at
shrines sacred to Guru Angad. Two kos from Amritsar, it was received by
Hargobind, Guru Arjan’s young son, accompanied by a large number of
Sikhs. He. bowed at his father’s feet and showered petals in front of the
pothis. Guru Arjan, Hargobind, Bhai Gurdas and Bhai Buddha now bore
the palanquin on their shoulders and marched towards Amritsar leq by
musicians, with flutes and drums. Reaching Amritsar, Guru Arjan first
went to the Harimandar to offer karah prasad in gratefuiness.

11. To quote the Gurbilas again, an attractive spot in the thick of a
forest on the outskirts of Amritsar was marked out by Guru Arjan. So
dense was the foliage that not even a moonbeam could pry into it. It was
like Panchbati itself, peaceful and picturesque. A tent was hoisted in this
idyllic setting. Here Guru Arjan and Bhai Gurdas started work on the
sacred volume.

12. The making of the Granth was no easy task. It Involved sustained
labour and a rigorous intellectual discipline. Selections had to be made
from a vast amount of material. Besides the compositions of the four
preceding Gurus and of Guru Arjan who himself was a poet with a rare
Spiritual insight, there were Songs and hymns by saints, both Hindu and
Muslim. What was genuine had to be sifted from what was counterfeit.
Then the selected material had to be assigned to appropriate musical
measures and transcribed in a minutely laid out order.

13. Guru Arjan carried out the work with extraordinary exactness, He
arranged the hymns in thirty different ragas, or musical patterns, A
Precise method was followed in setting down the compositions. First came
sabdas by the Gurus in the order of their succession. Then came astpadis,
chhants, vars, and other poetic forms in a set order, The compositions of
the Gurus in each raga were followed by those of the Bhaktas in the same
format. Gurmukhi was the script used for the transcription.
war

oF

ME

267

14. According to Bhai Gurdas’ testimony, the text had been transcribed
by Bhadon vad/ Ekam 1661/1 August 1604. At the head of the index he
recorded: “Sammat 1661 miti bhadon vadi ekam pothi likhi pahuche, i.e.
on Bhadon vad/ Ekam 1661 he had reached this spot where the index was
to begin after completing the writing of the book.” The index, giving the
opening words of each sabda or hymn and Pagination, is itself a marvel of
scholarly fastidiousness. A genius, unique in spiritual intuition and not
unconcerned with methodological design, had created a scripture with an
exalted mystical tone and a high degree of organization. It was large in
size—nearly 7,000 hymns, comprising compositions of the first five Sikh
Gurus and fifteen Bhaktas and Sufis from different parts of India,
including Shaikh Farid, Kabir and Ravidas. The Sacred Volume consisted
of 974 leaves, or 1948 pages, 12”x 8”, with several blank ones at the end
of a raga where there were not sabdas enough to fill the Section assigned

to it. The site of these marvellous fabours is now marked by a shrine
called Ramsar.

15. The completion of the Granth Sahib was, says the Gurbilas,
celebrated with much jubilation. In thanksgiving, karah Prasad was
Prepared in huge quantities. Sikhs came in large numbers to see the Holy
Book. They were rejoiced in their hearts by a sight of it and bowed before
it to pay homage. Among the visitors was Bhai Banno who had led a
group of Sikhs from Mangat, in western Punjab. Guru Arjan, who knew
him as a devoted Sikh, instructed him to go to Lahore and have the Book
bound. Banno sought the Guru’s permission to be allowed to take the
Granth Sahib first to Mangat for the Sikhs there to see it. The Guru

allowed this, but enjoined him not to tarry at Mangat, or at any other
place, more than a night.

16. As Banno left Amritsar with his sacred charge, it occurred to him to
have a second copy transcribed. The first copy, he argued, would remain
with the Guru. There must be an additional one for the sangat. The Guru's
direction was that he should not stay longer than one night at a place, but
he had said nothing about the time to be spent on the journey. So he
Proceeded with his plans and sent a Sikh to purchase paper. He proposed
to his companions that they should travel by easy marches of five miles a
day. The time thus saved was utilized in transcribing the holy text. Sikhs
wrote with love and devotion and nobody shirked his duty whether it was
day or night. By the time they reached Lahore, the second copy was

268

ready. But Banno had added to ‘it some apocryphal texts. He had both
volumes bound and returned to Amritsar as fast as he could.

17. At Amritsar, he was received with due ceremony, though Guru
Arjan was not a little surprised to see two volumes instead of one. Bhai

_ Banno spoke truthfully; “Lord, there is nothing that is hidden from you.

This second copy I have had made for the sake of the sangat.” But the
Guru accepted only the volume written in Bhai Gurdas hand. He enjoined
the Sikhs to own the Granth equal with the Guru and make no distinction
between the two. “He who would wish to see the Guru, let him see the
Granth. He who would seek the Guru’s word, let him read the Granth with
love and attention.”

18. Guru Arjan asked the Sikhs where the Granth Sahib be installed.
Bhai Buddha spoke, “You are omniscient, Master: But there is no place
more suitable than the Harimandar.” The Guru was happy to hear these
words, “like one who had sighted the new moon.” He then recited the
praise of the Harimandar: “There is nothing like it in all the three worlds.
Harimandar is like the ship—the means for the people to cross over the
worldly ocean triumphantly. A new joy pervades here every day. A sight
of ft annuls all sins.” .

19. It was decided to spend the night at Ramsar and return to Amritsar
the next morning. The Granth Sahib rested on a seat under the canopy,
whereas the Guru and the Sikhs slept on the ground.

20. A disciple had to be chosen to ‘take charge of the Granth Sahib. As
says the Gurbilas, Guru Arjan lay awake through the night reftecting on
the question. His choice finally fell on Bhai Buddha whose devotion was
universally applauded. As they awoke, the Guru and his Sikhs made
ablutions in Ramsar. The former thereupon practised his wonted
meditation. At dawn, the entire sangat marched towards Harimandar.
Bhai Buddha carried the Holy Book on his head and Guru Arjan walked
behind swinging the fly-whisk over it. Musicians sang sabdas. Thus they
reached the Harimandar. The Granth Sahib was ceremonially installed in
the centre of the inner sanctuary, The date was Bhadon sudi 1, 1661
Bk/16 August 1604. Bhai Buddha opened it with reverence to obtain from
it the divine command, as Guru Arjan stood in attendance behind. The
following hymn was read as God's own pronouncement for the occasion: -

w

Se

vw wwwwww i w

ww WwW

a a Coe

269

He Himself has aided his saints in their task,

He Himself has come to see their task accomplished,

Blessed is the earth, blessed the tank;
Blessed is the tank with amrit, nectar, filled.

Nectar everfloweth the tank: He has had the task completed;

Eternal is the Perfect Being,
His praises Vedas and Puranas Sing.

The Creator has bestowed on me the nine treasures, and all
the charisms.

No lack do I suffer now.

Enjoying His largesse, bliss have I attained,
Ever-expanding is the Lord’s bounty.

21. Guru Arjan directed that during daytime the Holy Book should
remain in the Harimandar and by night, after the Sohila was read, it
should be taken to the room he had built for himself in Guru-ka~Mahal. As
evening advanced by two watches, Bhai Buddha recited the Sohila and
made the concluding ardas or supplication. The Granth Sahib was closed
and wrapped in silks. Bhai Buddha held it on his head and marched
towards the chamber indicated by Guru Arjan. The Guru ted the sangat
singing hymns. The Granth Sahib was placed on the appointed seat, and
the Guru slept on the ground by its side. Daily in the small hours of the
morning as the stars twinkle in the pool below, the Holy Book is taken out
in state to the Harimandar and brought by night to rest—now, in a room
at the Akal Takht. The practice continues to this day. But the volume is
not the same. That original copy was taken to Kartarput when Guru
Arjan’s successor, Guru Hargobind, left Amritsar in 1634, There it passed

into the possession of his grandson, Dhir Mall. It has since remained in
that family.

22, In the Sikh system, the word Guru is used only for the ten prophet-
Preceptors, Guru Nanak to Guru Gobind Singh, and for none other. Now
this office of Guru is fulfilled by the Guru Granth Sahib, the Sacred Book,
which was so apotheosized by the last Guru, Guru Gobind Singh, before
he passed away in 1708. No living person, however holy or revered, can
have the title or status of Guru, For Sikhs, Guru is the holy teacher, the

270

prophet under direct commission from God—the Ten who have been and
the Guru Granth Sahib which is their continuing visible manifestation.

23. Guru Gobind Singh manifested the Khalsa in 1699. In 1708, he
supplied another Permanent—and final—feature in the evolution of the
Sikh faith when he installed the Holy Scripture as Guru. This is how the
Bhatt Vahi Talauda Parganah Jind describes the event:-

Guru Gobind Singh mahal dasman beta Guru Tegh Bahadur ka pota
Guru Hargobind ji ka parpota Guru Arjan ji ka bans Guru Ram Das ji ki
Surajbansi Gosal gotra Sodhi Khatri basi Anandpur parganah KaAlur
mugqam Nander tat Godavari des dakkhan sammat satran sai painsath
kartik mas ki chauth shukla pakkhe budhvar ke dihun Bhai Daya Singh se
bachan hoya Sri Granth Sahib lai ao bachan pai Daya Singh Sri Granth
Sahib lai aye guru ji ne panch paise narial age bheta rakha matha teka
sarbatt sangat se kaha mera hukam hai meri jagah Sri Granthji ko janana
jo sikh janega tis ki ghal thaen paegi guru tis ki bahuri karega sat kar
manana.

24. Guru Gobind Singh, the Tenth Master, son of Guru Tegh Bahadur,
grandson of Guru Hargobind, great-grandson of Guru Arjan, of the family
of Guru Ram Das, Surajbansi Gosal clan, Sodhi Khatri, resident of
Anandpur, parganah Kahlur, now at Nanded, on the Godavari bank in the
Deccan, asked Bhai Daya Singh, on Wednesday, shukla chauth of the
-month of Kartik, 1765 Bk (6 October 1708), to fetch the Sri Granth Sahib.
The Guru placed before it five pice and a coconut and bowed his head
before it. He said to the sangat, “It is my commandment: Own Sri
Granthji in my place. He who so acknowledges it wil! obtain his reward.
The Guru will rescue him. Know this as the truth.

25. According to Giani Garja Singh, who discovered this entry, the
author was Narbud Singh Bhatt, who was with Guru Gobind Singh at
Nanded at that time.

26. Bhatt Vahis are a new source of information discovered by Giani
Garja Singh (1904-77), a dogged searcher for materials on Sikh history.
The Bhatts were hereditary panegyrists, genealogists or family bards. (A
group of them were introduced to Guru Arjan by Bhatt Bhikkha, who
himself had become a disciple in the time of Guru Amar Das. According to
Bhai Gurdas, Var XI. 21, and Bhai Mani Singh Sikhan di Bhagat Mala, he
had earlier visited Guru Arjan with the sangat of Sultanpur Lodhi.) Those

eee.

27]

of them who came into the Sikh fold composed hymns in honour of the
Gurus which were entered in the Guru Granth Sahib by Guru Arjan.

To quote from the original, which is now in the possession of Bhai Chet
Singh, of the village of Bhai Rupa, in present-day Bathinda district, to
whose ancestors it was addressed: -

Ik Oankar Wahguru ji ki fateh, Sri Akalpurkh Ji ka Khalsa yak fang
Jina dithia Wahguru Ji chit avai. Bhai Sahib Dan Singhji Bhai Duni Singh ji

Khalsa ji bahut khushwagqat hoya tusadi bab Khalsa ji dayal hoya hai hath
jore kai jo rakhya hove. Jo janu harika sevako hari tiske kami.” Guru
Guru japna Wahguru ang sang hai fajal karkai rakhia hovegi Khalsaji Bhai

avana hatiya hai. Hor hatiya Guru japan naf dur hosan, par ih hatiya
gunah bakshiaiga nahi Jo manmukh ke jame upar aitkad karenge, ‘Mukh
mohi pheriai mukh mohi juttha hoi.’ Khalsaji tusan sivai Akal duje no
manana nahi. Sabad dasvin patshaji tak khojna, “Sabad khoji ihu gharu
lahai Nanak ta ka dasu. “Gury ka nivas sabad vich hai. “Guru mahi apo

272

samoi sabad vartaiya.” “Jian andar jiu sabad hai jit sahu milava hoi.”
Wahguru ji ki fateh. Bhai Mehar Singh tahlia Bhai Bule ka pattar ke
khasmane vich rahina Guru nail gandh paisi.

Ik Oankar Wahiguru ki Fateh.

29. The Khalsa, of the timeless Himself, immersed in the One, and
whose sight brings Wahiguru to mind. Addressed to Bhai Sahib Dan
Singhji, Bhai Duni Singhji, Bhai Jagat Singhji, Bhai Gurbakhsh Singhjji,
Ugar Singhji, Bhai Ram Singhji, the entire Khalsa of Wahiguru, the
Timeless One. From the slaves of the Khalsaji, Kahn Singhji, Nival Singh,
Mul Singhji, Sujan Singh, Gaja Singh, Maha Singh Wahiguruji ki Fateh to
the entire Khalsa. May you be rejoiced in constant remembrance of the
Timeless Wahiguru. May prosperity prevail; may supremacy belong to the
Khalsa. Having received your missive through Bhai Dulcha Singh, Khalsaji
is highly pleased. Khalsaji happily prays with folded hands for your
security, “He who to Lord surrenders himself, his affairs the Lord will set
to rights.” Repeat always the name of Guru. Wahiguru is by your side. He
will extend to you His grace and protection. Khalsaji, Mata Sahibji has
appointed Bhai Kahn Singhji to the superintendence of Amritsarji. The
Khalsaji, through a gurmata, has taken in hand the construction and
repair of the Harimandar and the garden. Sri Mata Sahibji has written that
ljangar must be run in that place which is the abode of God Himself. . . .
Wahiguru’s Khalsa must always be alert, possessed of discriminating
wisdom. The Khalsa must believe in none other than the Timeless One.
There have been only Ten Masters in human form; to believe in the
eleventh and twelfth, Banda Singh Bahadur, Ajita [Ajit Singh, adopted son
of Mata Sundariji] etc. is a mortal sin. Every other sin can be had
cancelled by repeating the Guru’s name, but this sin of believing in
human forms will not be remitted. “The faces turned away from the Guru
are faces perverted.” Khalsaji, you must believe in none other except the
Timeless One. Go only to the Ten Gurus in search of the Word. “Nanak is
the slave of him who by seeking the Lord’s Name obtains his goal.” The
Guru resides in sabda, “The Lord hath merged His own Self in the Guru
through whom He has revealed His word.” “The Word is the life of all life,
for, through it, one experiences God.” Victory to the Lord, Bhai Mehar
Singh, the messenger, son of Bhai Bula: keep the letter secure in your
custody. You will gain the Guru's favour.

30. From this ietter it is clear how the Sikhs after Guru Gobind Singh
believed that the Guruship had passed to the sabda, i.e. the Word as
contained in the Guru Granth Sahib. None in the human form after the
ten Gurus was to be acknowledged by the Sikhs as Guru. Those who, like
some of Banda Singh’s or Ajit Singh‘s followers, called their leaders Gurus
were committing a mortal sin. All other sins, says the letter, could be had
forgiven by repeating the Guru's name, but not the sin of believing in a
living Guru after the Ten Masters of the Sikh faith.

31. Several other old Sikh documents also attest the fact of succession
having been passed on by Guru Gobind Singh to the Guru Granth Sahib.
For instance, the Rahitnama by Bhai Nand Lal, one of Guru Gobind
Singh’s disciples remembered to this day for his elegant Persian poetry in
honour of the Gurus. In his Rahitnama, or code of conduct, Bhai Nand. Lal,
who was at Nanded in the camp of Emperor Bahadur Shah as one of his
ministers at the time of Guru Gobind Singh's passing away, thus records
his last words in his Punjabi verse:-

He who would wish to see the Guru,

Let him come and see the Granth.

He who would wish to speak with him,

Let him read and reflect upon what says the Granth.
He who would wish to hear his word,

He should with all his heart read. the Granth, or listen to the
Granth being read.

32. Another of Guru Gobind Singh’s disciples and associates, Bhai
Prahlad Singh, records in his Rahitnama, the Guru's commandment:

By the word of the Timeless One,

Has the Khalsa been manifested.

This is my commandment for all of my Sikhs:
You will acknowledge Granth as the Guru.

33. In Gurbilas Patshahi 10 (author Kuir Singh; the year of writing
1751), Guru Gobind Singh is quoted as saying:-

This is no more the age for a personal Guru to be anointed

I shall not place the mark on anyone's forehead.

All sangat is owned as Khalsa now, under the shelter of the

Almighty Himself,

They are now to the Word attached.

He who believes is the Sikh Par excellence,

On the Guru Granth should he put his reliance,
To none else should he direct his adoration.
All his wishes the Guru will bring to fulfilment,
This he should believe,

Casting away all dubiety.

34. Another authority that may relevantly be quoted is Devaraja
Sharma‘s Nanakacandrodayamahakavyam, an old Sanskrit manuscript
which has recently been published by Sanskrit University, Varanasi, It
records Guru Gobind Singh's proclamation that the Scripture would be the
Guru after him. “While the Master lay on his deathbed, Nand Lal (?) came
forward and asked the following question: ‘Who shall be the object of our
discourses?’ The Master replied, “The Granth, which itself is the doctrine
of the Guru, shall be your teacher. This ls what you should see; this is
what you should honour; this is what should be the object of your
discourses.”

35. This point has been laboured somewhat lengthily for the reason that
cavil is sometimes raised. Certain cults among Sikhs still owning personal
Gurus ask for authentic evidence to the effect that Guru Gobind singh had
named Sri Guru Granth Sahib his successor. No archival testimony can be
presented, unless the Bhatt Vahi entry be included in that category. But
evidence bequeathed through tradition—written as well as oral—supports
this fact. This is what has come down through Sikh memory. Had there
been the 11th Guru, the name could not have been effaced from the
Pages of history. Guru Gobind Singh brought to an end the line of
personal Gurus and declared the Holy Word Guru after him.

36. Along with the Guru Granth Sahib, the Khalsa was now the person
visible of the Guru. The word khalsa is derived from the Arabic khalis,
meaning pure or pious. Guru Gobind Singh used the term in its symbolic
and technical sense. In official terminology, Khalsa in Mughal days meant
lands or territory directly under the king. Crown-land was known as

AR TRE a

275

Khaisa land, As SayS a contemporary poet, Bhai Gurdas II, Guru Gobind
Singh converted the Sangat into Khalsa. Sikhs were the Guru’s Khalsa, i.e.
directly his own, without any intermediary or local Sangat leaders. On that
point, we have the evidence of Sri Gur Sobha by Sainapat, a
contemporary of Guru Gobind Singh and Guru Gobind Singh’s own
hukamnamas. To quote from the former:

A day preceding the event, f.e. passing of Guru Gobind Singh
The Sikhs gathered together And began to ask:-

“What body will the lord now take?”

The Guru at that moment spoke:

“In the Khaisa will you see me:

“With the Khalsa is my sole concern;

“My physicai form have I bestowed upon the Khalsa.”

37. Guru Gobind Singh, in his Aukamnama issued on Phagun 4, 1756
Bk/ 1 February 1700, to the sangat of Pattan Farid, modern Pakpattan,
refers to the sangat as ‘his own Khalsa.” Hukamnamas are letters written
by the Gurus to Sangats in different parts of the country. Some of them
have been traced in recent years and two collections were published in
1967—one by Dr Ganda Singh (Punjabi University, Patiala) and the
second by Shamsher Singh Ashok (Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak
Committee, Amritsar). Most of the hukamnamas are commen to both
anthologies. These hukamnamas are another valuable source of
Information on the lives of the Gurus and on the Sikh communities
forming in farflung places.

38. That Sri Guru Granth Sahib is Guru Eternal for it has been the
understanding and conviction of the Sikh community since the passing of
Guru Gobind Singh. In their hard, exilic days soon afterwards when they
were outlawed and had to seek the safety of the hills and jungles, the
Sikhs’ most precious possession which they cherished and defended at
the cost of their lives was Sri Guru Granth Sahib. The Holy Book was their
sole religious reference, and they acknowledged none other. To quote the
Prachin Panth Prakash: “Thou Guru Granth art the true Presence. Impart
to the Sikh sangat the true counsel”. This is how the Sikhs address Sri
Guru Granth Sahib as they assemble at the Akal Takht to seek its
guidance before launching an attack on the Pathan citadel of Kasur. In the
time of Maharaja Ranjit Singh, who established sovereignty in the name

of the Khalsa, personal piety and court ceremonial centred upon the Guru
Granth Sahib. As contemporary records testify, Ranjit Singh began his
day by making obeisance to Sri Guru Granth Sahib. On festive occasions,
he made pilgrimage to Amritsar to bow before Sri Guru Granth Sahib in
the Harimandar. For the Sikhs in general Guru Granth Sahib was the only
focus of religious attachment.

39. None other existed otherwise, either in human form or symbolically.
In all Sikh literature after Guru Gobind Singh, the Holy Book is uniformly
referred to as Guru Granth.

40. The personal Guruship was ended by Guru Gobind Singh himself.
Succession passed to the Guru Granth Sahib in perpetuity. This was 4
most significant development in the history of the panth.

41. The finality of the Holy Book was a fact rich in religious and social
implications. The Guru Granth became Guru and received divine honours.
It was acknowledged the medium of the revelation descended through the
Gurus. It was for the Sikhs the perpetual authority, spiritual as well as
historical. They lived their religion in response to it. Through it, they were
able to observe their faith more fully, more vividly. It was central to all
that subsequently happened in Sikh life. It was the source of their verbal
tradition and it shaped their intellectual and cultural environment. It
moulded the Sikh concept of life. From it. the community's ideals,
institutions and rituals derived their meaning. Its role in guaranteeing the
community integration and permanence and in determining the course of
its history has been crucial.

42. The Word enshrined in the Holy Book was always revered by the
Gurus as well as by their disciples as of Divine origin. The Guru was the
revealer of the Word. One day the Word was to take the place of the
Guru. The line of personal Gurus could not have continued forever. The
inevitable came to pass when Guru Gobind Singh declared Sri Guru
Granth Sahib to be his successor, It was only through the Word that the
Guruship could be made everlasting. This object Guru Gobind Singh
intuitively secured when he pronounced Granth Sahib to be Guru after
him, The Granth Sahib was henceforth—for all time to come—the Guru for

the Sikhs.

43, Since the day Guru Gobind Singh vested succession in it, the Guru
Granth has commanded the same honour and reverence as would be due
to the Guru himself. It is the focal point of Sikh devotion. The object of
veneration in Sikh gurdwaras is Sti Guru Granth Sahib; gurdwara is in

i a ee 2 ee |

44. A very beautiful custom is that of akhand

278

45, Important days on the Sikh calendar are marked by akhand paths in
gurdwaras. Celebrations and ceremonies in Sikh families centre upon
akhand paths. The homes are filled with holiness for those two days and
nights as Sri Guru Granth Sahib, installed with due ceremony in a room
especially cleaned out for the occasion, is being recited. Apart from
lending the air sanctity, such readings make available to listeners the
entire text. The listeners come as they wish and depart at their will, Thus
they keep picking up snatches of the bani from different portions at
different times. Without such ceremonial recitals, Sri Guru Granth Sahib,
a very large volume, would remain generally inaccessible to the laity
except for banis which are recited by Sikhs as their daily prayers. In
bereavement, families derive comfort from these paths. Obsequies in fact
conclude with a completed reading of Sri Guru Granth Sahib and prayers
are offered in its presence at the end for the departed soul.

46. There are variations on akhand path as well. A common one is the
saptahik path wherein the recital of the text is taken in parts and
completed within one week. A sahaj or slow-reading path may continue
for a longer time, even for months. In ati akhand path, the entire text will
be read out by a single individual without any interruption for whatsoever
purpose. For these paths the Holy Book is recited or intoned, not merely
read, This brings out tellingly the poetic quality of the bani and its power
to move or grip the listener. But it must be heard in silence, sitting on the
floor in front of it in a reverent posture.

47. The bani of Sri Guru Granth Sahib is all in the spiritual key. It is
poetry of pure devotion, lyrical rather than philosophical, moral rather
than cerebral. It prescribes no social code, yet Sri Guru Granth Sahib is
the basis of Sikh practice as well as of Sikh devotion. It is the living
source of authority, the ultimate guide to the spiritual and moral path
pointed by the Gurus. Whatever Is in harmony with its tenor will be
acceptable; whatever not rejectible. Guidance is sought from it on
doctrine, on the tenets of the faith.

48, The Sikh Panth as a whole will resort to Sri Guru Granth Sahib as
will the individual in moments of perplexity or crisis, Whether or not to
attack Kasur, the Pathan stronghold, to have the abducted wife of a
helpless Brahman who had come to the Akal Takht to appeal to the Sikhs
for help, was the question before them in the year 1763. Finally, as
records the Prachin Panth Prakash, it was decided to obtain the counsel of
the Guru Granth Sahib. Instance comes to mind also of the early days of
the Gurdwara movement aiming to reform the ritual in Sikh places of

worship. On 12 October 1920, a meeting of Sikh backward castes,
sponsored by the faculty and students of the Khalsa College at Amritsar,
was held in the Jallianvala Bagh. The following morning some of them
were taken to the Golden Temple, but the granthis in control refused to
accept karah prasad or sacrament they had brought as an offering and to
say the ardas on their behalf. There was an outburst of protest against
this discrimination towards the so-called low-caste Sikhs, totally contrary
to the Sikh teaching. A compromise was at last reached and it was
decided that the Guru’s direction be sought.

49. Sri Guru Granth Sahib was, as is the custom, opened at random and
the first verse on the page to be read was:-

He receives the lowly into grace,
And puts them in the path of righteous service.

50. The Guru’s verdict was clearly in favour of those whom the granthis
had refused to accept as full members of the panth, This was triumph for
reformist Sikhs. The karah prasad brought was accepted and distributed
among the sangat,

51. Singly or in groups, in their homes or-in congregations in their
places of worship, Sikhs conclude their morning and evening prayer, or
prayer said at any other time as part of personal piety or of a ceremony,
with a supplication called ardas. Ardas is followed by the recitation of
these verses: -

Agya bhai Akal ki tabhi chalayo Panth,

Sabh sikkhan kau hukam hai Guru manio Granth.
Guru Granth ji manio pragat Guran ki dehi.

Jo Prabhu ko milibo chahai khoj sabad main lehi.

By the command of the Timeless Creator was the Panth
promulgated;

All Sikhs are hereby charged to own the Granth as their Guru.
Know the Guru Granth to be the person visible of the Gurus.
They who would seek to meet the Lord

Tn the Word as manifested in the Book shall they discover him.

This is the status, the significance of the Holy Book in-the Sikh way
of life,
280

52. In the Vedic hymns and chants lie the beginnings of the religious
poetry of mankind. The Vedas are the oldest texts in the world, They are
the repositories of ancient wisdom and of the earliest Meditations of the

called chhants, i.e. prosody, or science of metrical composition, Much of
the old religious literature is in verse which is easier to memorize and

53. Those versed in Sanskrit poetics made classifications of Poetry from
various standpoints, Dandin made a three-fold division into prose
(gadya), verse (padya) and mixture of prose and verse (mishra). Experts
in Sanskrit poetics held that versification was not a necessary condition of
poetry. An epic poem Mahakavya in the style of muktaka, a single verse
formation, is an example of padya. A Narrative tale kathe constitutes
mishra variety. Ornate Poetry was kavya cultivated in Sanskrit, Pali,
Prakrit and Apabhramsa. ; ; .

54. Several new trends appeared in the devotiona! literature of the saint
poets of a later . period, These new forms of Poetry and political

devotees rather than professionals trained in literary niceties of Sanskrit
composition. Their main concern was to sing the glory of God and to
strengthen moral qualities. Occasionally, they attacked current social and
religious abuses. Their verse was addressed to the learned as well as to
the illiterate, to men as well as to women. Their language was easily

them a musical turn, They chanted and sang their hymns or verses, and
the community . chanted, sang and danced with them. In their

tunes, both classical and desi, of folk origin, wherein, while singing, lapse
of a few matras (syllables, accented and unaccented) could be easily
made up, and it was not absolutely necessary strictly to observe the
matras of various types of chhands of the Indian pingal, The Poetry of the

281

bhakti period was non-conformist, liberal and free. This was the Poetry of
sadhus and fakirs who had had no scholarly training, but who had the
Spiritual and mystical experience, They had seen and realized the
Supreme, were free and frank, truthful and blessed.

56. The divine poets of Sri Guru Granth Sahib were conscious of their .
mission as well as of their capacity and dignity as poets. Kabir Says that
people might regard his outpourings as songs only, but they are in reality
meditations on the Supreme Being (GG, 335), Guru Nanak calls himself a

Gurus, proclaim that they were called upon by the Creator Himself to
proclaim their divine command and inspiration. Guru Arjan had
proclaimed that the banj had originated in the transcendent realms, dhur
ki bani. (GG, 628), Guru Nanak believed (Japu, 38) that the shabad
(divine word) was coined in the mint of the mind filled with the nectar of

rules of prosody was not their forte, though they quite often composed
also within the framework of rules and established forms.

considerations chiefly weighed with them: first, setting of the hymn in a
given raga (musical measure) and, secondly, its setting in a pada (stanza)
form; with the burden of the song lying in the couplet of rahau (pause).
The siokas they composed are Mostly couplets or groups of couplets.

the Indian scheme of ragas, each one has its Peculiar rasa (mood),
atmosphere, and time or season of singing. Dupada (two-stanza poems,
tipada (three-stanza poem), chaupada (four-stanza poem), astpadi
Ceight-stanza Poem), solaha (sixteen-stanza poem), chhants, lyrics,
longer and Shorter poems such as the Japu, vars, Oankar, Sidhgosti,

Sukhmani et. al. are all stanzaic arrangements. The stanzas in the Guru
Granth Sahib vary in length from one-line compositions to eight-line
structures. Lines in stanzas are, or can be, measured by the Indian
system of matras (syllables) without their conforming exactly to any of
the fixed metric chhands; gan, or varnik (word system) chhands being
mainly ruled out in case of the hymns in Sri Guru Granth Sahib. The
length of a line or the number of the feet in it varies from a short
utterance to a long undulating one, with a corresponding number of
pauses, etc. Rhyme is invariably there. Alliteration and internal rhymes
are often introduced.

58. The peculiar thematic or emotional nature of some of the
extraordinary hymns of the Guru Granth Sahib, mostly cast in the moulds
of folk-poetry of the Punjab is pointed out in the superimposition of the
caption which, besides, indicates the raga and the pitch (ghar), in which
the hymn is to be sung. Such peculiar descriptions in the titles are as
follows: -

(a) arati, anjali, sohila, swayyas, japu, thittin, patti, phunhe,
bavan-akhari, and baramaha are the titles which indicate the form
of poetry; patti, bavan-akhari and oankar are in the form of
acrostics, propounding philosophical and religious themes and
doctrines; thittin and baramaha are built around the lunar days and
the twelve solar months; swayas are encomiums offered to the
Gurus.

(b) alahanian (dirges), sadd, karhale, gatha, ghorian, chhant,
dakhne, var, ruttin and var sat (week days) are the moulds of the
folk-poetry of Punjab.

59. In the common life of the country, a/ahnian are sung to mourn a
death, ghorian are sung to celebrate a wedding; similarly chhants are
recited at the time of marriage; sadd (call) is a dirge, pahare quarters of
day or night, ruttin (seasons), var sat (week days), din-rain (day and
night) are the compositions stressing the importance of time which should
be utilized in remembrance of the Lord.

60. All the above titles of category 1 and 2 are stanzaic poems. These
moulds, however, are not the innovations of the Gurus.

61. Vedic hymns (suktas) are padas with varying number of padas
(stanzas) called mantras in each; later, with the rise of the bhakti
movement, padas in praise of Visnu, called the vishanpadas were most
common in the developing Indian vernaculars. The bavan-akkhari, patti or

®UOOOGES

@e ewrogadgses0é

283

acrostic forms are also traditional forms; baramaha was common mould
for singing of the pangs of separation in love in the various Indian
languages, including Sanskrit. Kalidas has composed a ‘poem on the
season: under varying names, poems of the themes and Spirit of
alahnian, sadd and ghorian have been sung in all medieval literatures of
India. Sloka has been the most Popular mould in Sanskrit and Hindi
literatures. It is a couplet piece with a serious philosophical theme. So
padas (hymns based on pad or stanzaic arrangement) and sioka, the chief

poetic forms used in the Guru Granth Sahib have descended from the
preceding Indian religious literature,

62, A brief description of some of the poetic forms occurring in the Guru
Granth Sahib is given below. Each faga of Sri Guru Granth Sahib—there
are thirty-one ragas totally—is arranged in a set order. First will come
padas or the prosodic forms followed by longer snatches such as astpadis.

Then will come chhants and vars. And last of all, the compositions of
bhaktas,

63. ASTPADIS. Astpadis, eight liners. Hymns in Sri Guru Granth Sahib
comprising eight (ast) lines, besides the line containing pause of rahau.
This is the standard form, but the number of‘lines in an astpadi can Vary.
Astpadis occur in all the different ragas in Sri Guru Granth Sahib. Totally,
there are 305 of them counted in the entire text.

64. CHAUPADA is a four-stanza hymn, besides the line of rahau or
pause. With the exception of Bairarl, Tukhari, Kalian and Jaijaivanti, they

occur in all ragas of Sri Guru Granth Sahib, Gauri contains 210 of them,
Asa 159 and Sorathi 81.

65. CHHAKA. A sixer, It signifies a bunch of six padas

66. CHHEPADA its a hymn containing, besides the verse of rahau
(Pause), six padas or stanzas. They are few in numbers and occur in
ragas Gauri, Asa, Vadhans, Suhi, Ramkali, Maru and Bhairau,

67. CHAUTUKA. A hymn containing padas of four lines each. Chautukas
are interspersed in many different ragas of Sri Guru Granth Sahib.

68. DAKHNA. A salok in Lahndi dialect, western Punjabi, employed
commonly in Guru Arjan’s hymns.

69. DUPADA. A hymn containing, besides the rahau lines, two stanzas.

70. PANJPADA, A panjpada is a hymn of five stanzas excluding the
refrain (rahau),
284

71,  PAURI, lit. ladder, is stanza adopted for vars, balladic poetry. Pauris

of these vars generally consist of 6 to 8 lines each. Stanzas of Japuji are
also traditionally called pauris..

72. SHABAD represents ‘Voice of the Master’, or word revealed. All
forms of verse included in Sri Guru Granth Sahib, padas, astpadis and
chhants are shabads.

73. -SALOK. A two-liner classical prosodic form allowing a variety of
metrical arrangement. Though a salok may not unravel new strands of
thought, it may well enlarge upon different aspects of an idea investing it
with the freshness of an Independent poem.

74, SOLAHA. A sixteen-stanza hymn. Raga Maru alone contains 62
Solahas 22 by Guru Nanak, 24 by Guru Amar Das, 2 by Guru Ram Das
and 14 by Guru Arjan.

75. TIPADA. A hymn made up of 3 pedas or stanzas.

76, TUK does not exist as a title or sub-title in Sri Guru Granth Sahib.
Any single line of the bani is a tuk and is close to what is known as
sutraor aphorism in Sanskrit or in the orthodox system of philosophy.

77. VAR. An old form of Punjabi narrative poetry highlighting the
exploits and acts of heroism and chivalry. On the psychological plane the
struggle is between the good and evil propensities in man.

Sukhmani

78. SUKHMANTL, titled Gauri Sukhmani in the Guru Granth Sahib. after
the musical measure Gauri to which it belongs, is a lengthy composition
by Guru Arjan which many include in their daily regimen of prayers. The
site, once enclosed by a dense wood, where it was composed around AD
1602-03, is still marked on the bank of the Ramsar pool in the city of
Amritsar. It is said that Baba Sri Chand, elder son of Guru Nanak and
founder of the Udasi order, came to Amritsar to meet Guru Arjan, then
engaged in composing the poem. The Guru who had by that time
completed sixteen astpadis, or cantos, requested him to continue the
composition. Baba Sri Chand, out of humility, only recited the sloka of
Guru Nanak following the Mul Mantra in the Japu—"“adi sachu jugadi sachu
hal bhi sachu Nanak hosi bhi sachu"—~In the beginning, in the primal time
was He the Eternal Reality; in the present is He the Eternal Reality. To
eternity shall He the Reality abide (GG, 285). This sfoka was thereupon
repeated by Guru Arjan at the head of the seventeenth astpadi,

9G66006060 686

fg

ww ©

wuw oe

wr ee wy

“

285

79. The word sukhmani is rendered into English as “consoler of the
mind.” The entire poem has been translated into English more than once
under the commonly preferred title,

80. The Sukhmanj comprises twenty-four astpadis or cantos, each
comprising eight stanzas. They are composed in the metre chaupai. A
sloka or couplet precedes each astpadi. The first seven stanzas of the
astpadi explore the theme stated in the preceding s/oka and the eighth

Divine immanence, Divine compassion, abundance of grace, God's
succouring hand, the merit of devotion, of holy company and humility,
With such reiteration, the composition: as a whole has a remarkable
gripping quality reinforced by the striking imagery which in stanza after
stanza brings home to the seeker the truths he must own,

81. The Sukhmani Opens with a manglacharan or invocation to the
Supreme Being. In this four-line sloka, the Supreme Being is remembered
8S adi gure (Primal Preceptor), jugadi gure (Preceptor from the beginning
of time existing), sati gure (the Truth Preceptor) and sri gurdeve
(Preceptor Divine). The following six astpadis dwell on the advantages of
remembrance, in a spirit of love, devotion and surrender, of the Holy

Name which results in linking up one’s consciousness with the divine. This
brings bliss, peace and approval at the Divine Court,

286

82. Name Divine is man’s true helper and friend, the true conferrer of
joy and bliss as against the trust in yogic austerities, ascetic practices and
ritual worship which are of no avail in liberating him from the cycle of
birth and death. Ineffective in the same way are intellectual feats and
membership of religious orders. Remembrance of the Divine Name is the
most exalted of all religious Practices and the purest of all ritual actions.
Ungrateful to God and indifferent to devotion, humanity is in bondage to
lust, wrath, avarice, attachment and pride—the five evils. Forgetful of
God, man remains attached to maya which is compared to rejecting a
jewel and chasing a-cowrie. Man is warned of those drawbacks and is
exhorted constantly to meditate on the Divine Name which becomes
possible only when he overcomes his €go and cultivates humility which, in
turn, is attained only through the Lord’s grace,

83. Astpadis seven to eleven deal with the concept of perfect man, and
ideal man, a man of God. He is jivanmukta, i.e. one who has become
liberated while still living in the mortal body. Such a person is detached
from grief and joy. To him gold and dust, amrit (nectar) and poison,
Pauper and prince, worldly honour and dishonour are alike. The company
of the holy—sadh sangat—which confers on the disciple manifold Spiritual
benefits is a necessary prerequisite to achieving this ideal, though access
to this association is also dependent upon Divine grace. People so
sanctified havea wisdom even greater than that imparted by the Vedas
and. live beyond the friguna, i.e. the three attributes of maya.
Remembrance of God’s Name in the company of these saintly people is
preferable to all rituals and creeds, These verses also endorse access of
ail humanity, irrespective of colour, caste and creed, to divine knowledge,
and. to emancipation through meditation on His Name. Anyone who, with’
the Divine favour, keeps the company of the holy and repeats the Name
becomes God-enlightened, the Brahm-giani. He is free from all dubiety
and worldly entanglements, and his mind is always at peace, In the spirit
of the God-enlightened.may be beheld God who is otherwise nirankar, the
formless Supreme Being. God’s hukam is the sole source of the vast and
variegated creation. Far from being indifferent to the infinitude of:
creation, He responds to the love of the devout who are the crown of His
creation. Such persons are always blessed with joy and spontaneous bliss
and they transcend the pleasures and passions of this material wortd.

84. Astpadis twelve to twenty stress the significance of sadhna, or
discipline, for the Spiritual progress of man. Self-conceit and slander
against the saints are deadly sins which must be totally avoided. The one

who slanders the saints is considered to be the worst evil-doer, bereft of
all spiritual blessing. He ‘perishes, writhing like a fish out of water;
hopeless and unfulfilled, he leaves the world.

85. However, this kind of evil-doing is traced to the consequences of
deeds in a previous birth. This endless cycle of coming and going can be
broken only with the help of the Divine Preceptor who is like a famp in the
darkness, a guide in the pathless forest. His word helps man as a pillar
supports an edifice. Like a boat carrying a stone across the water, he
enables his disciple to pass over the wortdly ocean and end the torments
of transmigration. However, such a Preceptor one meets only by God’s
grace. The eradication of pride and inculcation of humility are two other
stepping-stones which lead to the Divine portal. Pride in such things as
royal authority, beauty, ritual acts, austere practices, wealth and estates
is condemned. Besides being humble and contented, one must repose
life’s hope solely in God. Man is exhorted to recite the glory of God which
will bring him true blessing.

86. The last four astpadis, i.e. from twenty-one to twenty-four, contain
an exposition of God’s absolute powers. He is the sole creator of this
world and none can fathom His greatness. He is the creator of, but free
from, triguna maya and is infinite and eternal. There was utter emptiness
before the creation which is the result of His Will. Here the monist aspect
of. the Lord as the Sole Existence is emphasized. He is the Supreme
comforter, compassionate, controller of the inner faculties and cherisher
of all. He is without rancour and it is through His hukam and grace that
man acquires true wisdom. The path to this ideal is shown by the
Preceptor, who applies the collyrium of enlightenment by banishing the
darkness of ignorance. By such enlightenment, man seeks company of
the saintly and sees the Lord within himself and in all the external
creation as well. God abides within all yet remains unattached. The last
astpadi sums up the teachings of the earlier cantos. The one who wants
to find God is exhorted to dwell on the Divine Name, as taught by the
Guru, in the company of the saints which alone will help him shed ego
and inculcate humility. Thus will he discard worldly desire and cross the
ocean of fire (i.e. of sin and suffering).

87. Sukhmani js a theological statement of the major tenets of Sikhism
expressed in a devotional poetic form. Recited by the Sikhs as a part of
their morning prayer, it is one of the easier texts in the Guru Granth
Sahib. It is similar in syntax and structure, though its essentia/ meaning

an pa ih

288

will elude one not attuned to the spiritual experience and the idiom and
phraseology of gurbani. The language character is close to Khari Boli, the
Hindi that had evolved in the areas lying northwest of Delhi, with a
distinct inclination towards Punjabi. The expression here, however, is
poetic in its overtones and shares a common character with the variety of

Hindi or Bhakha that was used by religious teachers all over northern

India. While this language has evolved out of Braj, it is closer to Punjabi
in its grammatical form. This will be substantiated by comparing it with
the language of a poet writing in pure Braj, such as Surdas, who
flourished around the same period as Guru Arjan. To indicate the
differences of the language of Sukhmani from Braj even Bhakha, a few
examples may be given:

88. Thivai (3.2) is Punjabi, so is ditha (7.7). Khate (12.5) is pure
Punjabi, In niki Kiri (17.5), niki (small) is Punjabi. Ohi (23.4)) is Punjabi,
of which the Braj equivalent would be vehi, Hoi (past verbal form) is
Punjabi. Bhau (18.7) for bhaya (fear) is an especial form given in gurbani
and occurring frequently. The Punjabi character of language is especially
decipherable in the forms of verb ending in the past tense. Kathia (8.7),
pachhata (17.8), jata (19.8), in the sense of jania, japia (20.2), rahia
(20.3), aradhia (salok 24) are some of the examples. Other verb forms
to illustrate this point are utaras/ (19.7) which, however, is also
Rajasthani; baha/ (15.2); lae (13.5) and /aini (15.5). Here and there pure
Hindi forms may be seen: hovat (21.1), tumari (20.7) and biapat (21.1).
Japat rhyming with it in the same stanza is Punjabi with a Hindi ending.

89. The language of the Sukhmani can be best described as a synthesis
of the Bhakha and Punjabi. In the more philosophical and meditative of
their compositions, the holy Gurus are inclined to use a variety of Hindi
with Punjabi overtones, while in the more deeply intimate pieces such as
the chhants and pauris of Vars, Punjabi, in its dialectical variations, has
been employed. This principle, by no means absolute, is only broadly
applicable.

Chapter 5

Conclusion

1. — Sikh religion started with the birth of Guru Nanak in 1469 and
progressed through the ten Gurus to finally making of ‘Singhs’ by 10%
Guru, Guru Gobind Singh on 13 Apr 1699, Tt has stood through various
litmus tests of varied testing times Including facing of cruelties of mugal

~ Invaders on Indians, the british rule and the hardships incurred during the

freedom struggle of independent India.The point to highlight is that it

always stood on the correct side to protect the helpless and downtroden
people.

2, Today, as Sikhism stands, it is not mere symbolic but it is a way of
life. A life full of truth, hardwork, originality and facing all evil with

braveness. Thus, practically true Sikhism is just to follow truth and lead a
truthful life.

A HISTORY OF THE REIGNING FAMILY OF LAHORE, bearing the full title A History of
the Reigning Family of Lahore with some account of the Jummoo Rajahs, the Seik
Soldiers and their Sirdars; with notes on Malcolm, Prinsep, Lawrence, Steinbach,
McGregor and the Calcutta Review, by Major G. Carmichael Smyth, of the third

Bengal Light Cavalry, was first published in 1847 and reprinted in 1970 by the
Languages Department, Punjab, Paṭiālā, and in 1977 by Vikrānt Press, Delhi. As
stated in the Introduction, written at Jalandhar on 5 January 1847, the book was
compiled "partly from native manuscripts, and partly from information collected from
Seik service; but chiefly from the notes of a Captain Gardner of the Seik Artillery."
Personally Smyth emerges from the Introduction as an ardent advocate of
expansionist policies in whose eyes British rule was a blessing to be extensively
conferred. He was critical of the British Indian government which, he thought, was
hesitant, for fear of the public opinion back at home, to pursue an aggressive policy
towards the Punjab.

The first of the five sections of the book traces the history of Raṇjīt Siṅgh's
family and the career of the Mahārājā up to the occupation of Lahore, skipping the
latter part of his career for, as says the author, it had been "too often told" to
warrant repetition. For this account he depended primarily on oral tradition collected,
directly or indirectly, from the subjects of the kingdom of Lahore. The second
section, comprising twelve chapters, relating to court intrigues by which kings were
made and unmade in quick succession after the death of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh and
an additional one on the Anglo-Sikh war, is the longest and, from the author's
viewpoint, the most important part of the book. This rather detailed account of the
Sikh dynasty covering a period of about six years is based entirely on the notes of
Captain Gardner. Although the numerous events of these years are presented in the
chronological order with a certain rationale imposed upon them, very few dates are
mentioned and of those mentioned none is of any significance. Smyth considers this
material as the core of the whole work and, in fact, he might not have at all
attempted this work without this core. Since this material was taken from the notes
of Captain Gardner, he refers to himself as editor, and not author, of the book. The
chapter on the Anglo-Sikh war endeavours to prove the English thesis that the
conflict was the result of the desire of Mahārāṇī Jind Kaur and Lāl Siṅgh to punish
the Sikh army which was no more under their control. The Sikh soldiers fought hard
and well, but were betrayed by their commanders, notably Lāl Siṅgh (cavalry) and
Tej Siṅgh (infantry). Gulāb Siṅgh, who came to negotiate with the British terms of
peace on behalf of the Sikhs, was also not their well-wisher and bargained to obtain
Jammū and Kashmīr for himself.
The section, entitled "Miscellaneous Notices," comprises brief notes on Akālī
Phūlā Siṅgh, Zorāwar Siṅgh, a minister and military leader under Gulāb Siṅgh, Fateh
Khān Ṭiwāṇā, who in conjunction with Chatar Siṅgh Aṭārīvālā had Prince Pashaurā
Siṅgh murdered, the mutiny in Kashmīr and the Sūdhan revolt. The fourth section,
comprising two chapters, traces the history of the Jammū family and describes
briefly the careers of Gulāb Siṅgh, Dhiān Siṅgh and Suchet Siṅgh till they became
the vassals of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh.
The Appendix contains information likely to be of use to the prospective
masters of the Punjab. To provide an insight into the social and political history of
the people that inhabited the land, the author has commented upon extracts from

Malcolm's Sketch of the Sikhs, Prinsep's Life of Runjeet Singh, Lawrence's
Adventures of an Officer in the Punjaub, Steinbach's Punjab, The Medieval and
Literary Journal for January 1845, and the Calcutta Review for August 1844. This is
followed, besides listing among other things the natural and cultivated produce of
the Punjab, by an abstract showing the disposition of the Sikh army as of 1 July
1844, a description of the boundary of the Punjab in 1845, a list of principal Sardārs
and their group affiliations, the strength of the standing army of the Punjab in 1845,
a list of the European officers in Sikh service, the amount of revenue for 1844, and a
list of the products and manufactures of commercial interest.
Haughtiness, contempt and sneer are woven into the texture of Smyth's
language. One merit of the work lies in the use the author makes of the notes of
Captain Gardner which, in any case, are available separately. Smyth was publically
reprimanded by the Government of India for his "infamous book" when it was
brought to its notice.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Fauja Siṅgh ed., Historians and Historiography of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1978
Khurana, Gianeshwar, British Historiography on the Sikh Power in Punjab.
Delhi, 1985
Darshan Singh, Western Perspective on the Sikh Religion. Delhi, 1991
Grewal, J.S., Guru Nanak in Western Scholarship, Delhi, 1992
J. S. Grewāl

A JOURNEY FROM BENGAL TO ENGLAND, "through the northern part of India,

Kashmīr, Afghanistan, Persia, and into Russia by the Caspian Sea," by George
Forster, 2 vols., was first published in 1790 and reprinted in 1970 by the Languages
Department, Punjab, Paṭiālā. The book is an account of travels, perhaps the first
ever in this part of the world by a European writer. The first volume relates to the
author's journey from Calcutta to the Punjab with a section on Hindu mythology, a
brief history of the Ruhīlās and a description of the origin and growth of the Sikhs in
the Punjab. The narrative about the Punjab begins with sketches in chronological
order of the ten Gurūs of the Sikh faith, followed by Bandā Siṅgh Bahādur's career,
repression of the Sikhs under Ādīnā Beg and Mīr Mannū and their continued
resistance. The invading hordes of Ahmad Shāh Durrānī suffer harassment at the
hands of the Sikhs. At this point the narrative ends to discuss some of the salient
features of the land of the Sikhs. It is recorded that the extensive and fertile territory
yielded a revenue of 24,695,000 rupees. Extensive and valuable commerce was also
maintained with Bengal, Bihar and other parts of India.
Forster does not fasten any distinguishing term upon the existing Sikh form of
government. To him it bore an appearance of aristocracy (p. 328). The Sikh military
force consisted mainly of cavalry, with a negligible artillery. Infantry, according to
author, was held in low esteem and more often assigned meaner duties. In the end,
Forster predicted with uncommon prescience : "Should any future cause call forth
the combined efforts of the Sicques [Sikhs] to maintain the existence of empire and
religion, we may see some ambitious chief led on by his genius and success, and,
absorbing the power of his associates, display, from the ruins of their
Commonwealth, the standard of monarchy" (p.340). The second volume of the book
begins with the author's journey through Kashmīr which, according to him, is
"unparalleled for its air, soil and a picturesque variety of landscape" (p.1.) and ends
with his arrival in Russia through Afghanistan and Persia.
The facts given in the book are, in the main, reliable, except at a few places.
For example, the author seems to be unaware of the truce which took place
between the Sikhs and Ādīnā Beg, thus erroneously attributing to "the superior
power of the Marhattas" and the fear of "incurring the resentment of Adīnā Beg"
(p.318) the Sikhs' reluctance to lead incursions into the low country during Ādīnā
Beg's governorship of Lahore.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Darshan Singh, Western Perspective on the Sikh Religion. Delhi, 1991
Khurana, Gianeshwar, British Historiography on the Sikh Power in Punjab.
Delhi, 1985
Fauja Singh, Historians and Historiography of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1985
B. J. Hasrat

ABBOTT, SIR JAMES (1807-1896), British Resident's assistant at Lahore, capital of
the Sikh kingdom, after the first Anglo-Sikh war (1845-46), was born on 12 March
1807, the son of Henry Alexius Abbott. Passing out of the military college of the East
India Company at Addiscombe, England, Abbott received commission as a secondLieutenant in the Bengal artillery in 1823. In November 1830, he joined the army of
the Indus, under Sir John Keane, for the invasion of Afghanistan. In 1842, he was
appointed assistant to the British Resident at Indore. In 1846, Abbott was
designated commissioner for settlement of the Punjab boundaries. He became
Resident's assistant at Hazārā in 1848. From Hazārā, he sent reports to the British
Resident at Lahore accusing Chatar Siṅgh Aṭārīvālā, the governor of Hazārā, of high
treason and describing him as the leader of a conspiracy for a general uprising of
the Sikhs against the British.
A minor disaffection in August 1848 in a Sikh brigade stationed at Hazārā so
excited Abbott that, without any authority, he took upon himself to suppress what
he described as "the national rising of the Sikhs. " He incited the Hazārā chiefs and
the armed Muslim peasantry to destroy the Sikh brigade. He then raised Muslim
levies and marched on Hazārā to expel Chatar Siṅgh, the governor. Abbott's
mercenary force surrounded the town. Commodore Canora, the Armenian artillery
commander of the fortress, whom Abbott had won over, refused to move his
batteries at Chatar Siṅgh's orders. At the orders of the Sikh governor, Canora was
overpowered and killed. Abbott now demanded retribution, but Sir Frederick Currie,
the Resident at Lahore, did not approve of the assumption of civil and military
authority by his subordinate. Abbott, however, ignored the protestations from the
Lahore residency and set up a jihād, crusade, against the Sikhs. His acts provoked
the Hazārā revolt which culminated in the second Anglo-Sikh war.
James Abbott wrote The Narrative : An Account of Personal Services at Hazara,
an English manuscript referred to by Captain L. J. Trotter in hisThe Life of John
Nicholson-Soldier and Administrator. The chronicle gives details from Abbott's point
of view of Chatar Siṅgh Aṭārīvālā's revolt against the British at Hazārā and at Lahore.
James Abbott who retired as a general died on 6 October 1896.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Hasrat, B. J. , ed. and annot. , The Punjab Papers. Hoshiarpur, 1970
Khushwant Siṅgh, A History of the Sikhs. Princeton, 1963, 1966
Buckland, C. E. , Dictionary of Indian Biography. London, 1906
B. J. Hasrat

ABCHAL NAGAR, more correctly spelt Abichalnagar (abichal, lit. firmly fixed,
unshakably rooted), i. e. City Everlasting, is the name Sikh tradition has given
Nāndeḍ, a district town in Mahārāshṭra. The place is sacred to Gurū Gobind Siṅgh,
who passed away here on 7 October 1708. The shrine honouring his memory is
treated as a Takht, seat constituting decisive religious authority for the Sikhs, and is
named Takht Sachkhaṇḍ Srī Hazūr Sāhib, Achalnagar.
The name was probably suggested by a Scriptural line abichal nagaru gobind
gurū kā nāmu japat sukhu pāiā rām (rooted steadfast stands the City of the Master-

Lord where solace is attained by repeating the Name (GG, 783), usually interpreted
as referring to the City of Amritsar founded by Gurū Rām Dās, Nānak IV.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Tārā Singh Srī Gur Tīrath Saṅgrahi. Amritsar, n. d.
Ṭhākar Siṅgh, Giānī, Srī Gurduāre Darshan. Amritsar, 1923.
Randhir, G. S. , Sikh Shrines in India, Delhi, 1990.
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

'ABD US-SAMAD KHĀN (d. 1737), governor of Lahore from 1713 to 1726, a
descendant of the Naqashbandī saint 'Abdullā Ahrār, a great grandson of Khwājā
Bākī of Baghdād, was born at Āgrā when his father, Khwājā 'Abd ul-Karīm Ansārī,
had come out with his family from Samarkand on a tour of India during the reign of
Emperor Auraṅgzīb. When Samad Khān was two years old, his parents returned to
Samarkand where he passed the early years of his life and where he attained the
office of Shaikh ul-Islām. Soon thereafter he came to India obtaining appointment at
the court of Auraṅgzīb. He served for many years in the Deccan without attracting
much notice. However, when Farrukh-Sīyar came to the throne of Delhi, he
appointed 'Abd us-Samad Khān governor of Lahore in February 1713 charging him
with the annihilation of the Sikh leader, Bandā Siṅgh Bahādur, who had raised a
revolt in the Punjab. 'Abd us-Samad Khān's son, Zakarīyā Khān, was sent to Jammū
as faujdār to render assistance to his father. 'Abd us-Samad Khān's troops
succeeded in driving Bandā Siṅgh and his Sikhs out of their strongholds in the plains
- Saḍhaurā and Lohgaṛh - into the hills. As Bandā Siṅgh descended from his
mountain retreat in February 1715, Samad Khān assembled an army of Mughals,
Paṭhāns, Bundelā Rājpūts and the Rājpūts of Kaṭoch and Jasroṭā and moved
northwards to attack Bandā Siṅgh. According to Akhbār-i-Darbār-i-Mu'allā, 'Abd usSamad Khān marched from Lahore at the head of twelve thousand sowārs and an
equal number of foot-soldiers, besides a big topkhānā (artillery), and closed in upon
Bandā Siṅgh as he was putting up his defence fortifications in a village, near Baṭālā.
Artillery firing forced Bandā Siṅgh to come into the open field. He made a
determined stand and fought fiercely, but overwhelmed by a force vastly superior in
strength and resources, he escaped northwards and took shelter in the havelī or
fortress of one Dunī Chand at the village of Gurdās-Naṅgal, about 6 km to the west
of Gurdāspur. 'Abd us-Samad Khān threw such a tight cordon around the havelī that
"not a blade of grass or a grain of corn could find its way in. " For eight months the
garrison resisted the siege under gruesome conditions. The royal troops at last broke
through and captured Bandā Siṅgh and his famishing Sikhs (17 December 1715).
Under the orders of Samad Khān over two hundred of the prisoners were executed.
The rest, including Bandā Siṅgh and his family, were put in chains and taken to
Lahore, thence to Delhi. In 1726, Samad Khān was transferred to Multān, his son,
Zakarīyā Khān, replacing him as governor of Lahore.
'Ābd us-Samad Khān died on 26 July 1737. For more than two decades he had
enjoyed the confidence of the Delhi emperors and received from them titles such as
Daler Jaṅg (Brave in Battle) and Saif ud-Daulā (Sword of the State), with a rank of
seven thousand.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Irvine, W. , Later Mughals. London, 1922
Nijjar, B. S. , Panjab under the Later Mughals. Jalandhar, 1972
Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Twārīkh Gurū Khālsā [Reprint]. Patiala, 1970
Bhagat Singh, trans. and ed. , Akhbār-i-Darbār-i-Mu'allā. Patiala, 1984
Harbans Singh, The Heritage of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1987
Bhagat Siṅgh

'ABDUL RASŪL KASHMĪRĪ, a native of Srīnagar who was in trade at Amritsar as a
shawl merchant, was for a time a close confidant of Mahārājā Duleep Siṅgh, the last
Sikh king of the Punjab deposed by the British in 1849. Kashmīrī acted as the
deposed Mahārājā's liaison man with governments of Turkey and Egypt. In 1860,
Abdul Rasūl moved from India to Egypt, and thence to London where he joined the
Nile expeditionary force as an interpreter. Owing to his secret connection with the
Mahdī, he was discharged from the service. He was again in England to seek redress
when he met the deposed Mahārājā Duleep Siṅgh who employed him to further his
cause. When Duleep Siṅgh returned from Aden to Europe he sent for Abdul Rasūl
from London to Paris and through him met Assud Pāshā, the Turkish Ambassador in
Paris. 'Abdul Rasūl travelled to Constantinople with a view to contacting the Caliph.
Through his good offices Duleep Siṅgh seems to have befriended Patrick Casey, an
Irishman, whose passport he used when travelling from Paris to Russia. Summoned
by the Mahārājā, 'Abdul Rasūl also arrived in Moscow and campaigned to rally the
local Muslims to his cause. Early in 1890, Duleep Siṅgh sent him to India. He was
arrested on board the ship and upon landing in Bombay despatched to Asīrgaṛh Fort
for detention. A few months later, he was released and provided passage to go to
London. In March 1892, 'Abdul Rasūl sued Mahārājā Duleep Siṅgh in a Paris court
seeking a life pension for the services he had rendered him.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ganda Singh, ed. , History of the Freedom Movement in the Punjab, vol. III
(Maharaja Duleep Singh Correspondence). Patiala, 1977
K. S. Thāpar

'ABDULLĀ, BHĀĪ, Abdul according to some Sikh chroniclers, was a Muslim minstrel
who recited heroic balladry at Sikh congregations in the time of Gurū Hargobind
(1595-1644). Abdul was born in the village of Sur siṅgh, now in Amritsar district of
the Punjab. He first came to Amritsar in1606 at the time of the installation ceremony
for Gurū Hargobind at the Akāl Takht. According to Gurbilās Chhevīṅ Pātshāhī, he
and his companion, Bhāī Natthā, sang the stanza on the occasion :
The Throne everlasting
Has by the Holy Gurū's presence become haloed,
Indescribable is its splendour,
How may I sing its glory!
Seeing the Gurū,
Both the sun and the moon were shamed.
So sat on the throne the Holy Gurū to
the remembrance of the Lord God attached.
Abdul and Natthā have composed verse
to sing his praise.

Both Abdul and Natthā remained at Amritsar thereafter and recited poetry
extolling chivalrous deeds of past heroes.
As Bābā Gurdittā, Gurū Hargobind's eldest son, got married, he was taken
round by the Gurū to Akāl Takht and Harimandar Sāhib to make obeisance. The
Gurū then invited Abdul to recite a panegyric.
Abdul and Natthā, as reports Gurbilās Chhevīṅ Pātshāhī, accompanied Gurū
Hargobind when he left Amritsar for Kīratpur in the Śivālik hills. As his time came,
Gurū Hargobind asked them to return to their native Sursiṅgh.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Gurbilās Chhevīṅ Pātshāhī. Patiala, 1970
Macauliffe, Max Arthur, The Sikh Religion. Oxford, 1909
Gupta, Hari Ram, History of the Sikhs, vol. I. Delhi, 1973
Bhagat Siṅgh

'ABDULLĀ, KHWĀJĀ, a native of Manī Mājrā, near present-day Chaṇḍīgaṛh, was the
keeper of the jail at Chāndnī Chowk kotwālī in Delhi, where Gurū Tegh Bahādur,
Nānak IX, was detained under imperial warrant. He was a pious man and truly
reverenced the holy detenu. He tried to mitigate the rigour of his incarceration as far
as his official position permitted. After Gurū Tegh Bahādur's execution (1675), he
resigned his post and went to live at Anandpur, where he served Gurū Gobind Siṅgh,
Nānak X, as a physician. His son, Ghulām 'Abbās, served under Nawāb Kapūr Siṅgh
as a physician during misl times.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Twārīkh Gurū Khālsā [Reprint). Patiala, 1970
Trilochan Siṅgh, Guru Tegh Bahadur: Prophet and Martyr. Delhi, 1967
A. C. Banerjee

ABUL FAZL (1551-1602), principal secretary-cum-minister to Akbar, the Mughal
emperor. He was an accomplished man of learning and was the author of two
celebrated works, Ā'īn-i-Akbarī and Akbar-nāmā, the former being a description of
Akbar's administrative system and the latter a chronicle of the events of his reign.
Like his father, Shaikh Mubārak, and brother, Faizī, Abul Fazl had Sūfī leanings, and
all three of them were a major influence in moulding the religious policy of the
emperor. Born at Akbarārbād on 14 January 1551, Abul Fazl took up service at the
royal court in 1574, and through his uncommon wisdom and learning soon rose to
become Akbar's most trusted adviser. He accompanied the emperor on his visit to
Goindvāl on 24 November 1598 to see Gurū Arjan. The meeting is recorded in Abul
Fazl's Akbar-nāmā. Abul Fazl was assassinated by Bīr Siṅgh Bundelā on 12 August
1602 at the behest of Prince Salīm, later Emperor Jahāṅgīr, who harboured a dislike
for him for being his father's favourite.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Smith, Vincent A. , The Oxford History of India. Oxford, 1958
Mujeeb, M. , The Indian Muslims. London, 1967
Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Twārīkh Gurū Khālsā. Patiala, 1970
Balbīr Siṅgh Dil

ACHAL SĀHIB, GURDWĀRĀ, sacred to Gurū Nānak, is located on the boundary of
Sālho and Chāhal villages along the Jalandhar-Baṭālā road, 6 km south of Baṭālā
(31º 49'N, 75º 12'E) in Gurdāspur district of the Punjab. The low mound on which
the Gurdwārā is situated, in close proximity of the ancient Hindu temple dedicated to
Kārtikeya, son of Lord Śiva, is popularly known as Achal Vaṭālā. The Achal temple
had since old times been a place of pilgrimage visited by sādhūs from distant parts,
especially during the annual fair held on the occasion of Śivarātri festival. Sujān Rāi
Bhaṇḍārī, Khulāsat ut-Twārīkh, writing at the end of the seventeenth century, gives
a graphic account of this fair. Gurū Nānak came here at the time of one such fair
from Kartārpur, an habitation he had founded on the bank of the River Rāvī. In the
words of the Miharbān Janam Sākhī, "As the Gurū entered Achal, the name Nānak
spread everywhere among the crowds. Everyone began to say that Nānak, the
renowned saint, had come. Nānak whose śabdas or hymns the world recited was
himself there. Whoever was in Achal, rushed to see him. Neither a yogī was left nor
a sannyāsī; neither a householder was left nor a recluse. Not a soul remained
behind; whosoever there was thronged to the spot saying, “Nānak hath come,
Nānak hath come. " Gurū Nānak held a long discourse with the Nāth-yogīs led by
Bhaṅgar Nāth, who, according to Bhāī Gurdās, Vārāṅ, I. 40, began by questioning
him, "Why hast thou soured the milk by adding vinegar to it? Whoever obtained
butter by churning sour milk? Why, casting off the vestment of an Udāsī, hast thou
again adopted the life of a householder?" "Bhaṅgar Nāth, " replied the Gurū, "it is
thou that hast been perversely instructed. Thou didst not cleanse the vessel well, so
the butter turned rancid. Abandoning home-life thou turnest an anchorite, and yet
thou goest to beg at the doors of the householders. Thou wouldst have nothing to
live by if they gave thee nought. " The Nāths then tried to overawe Gurū Nānak with
a display of their magical powers, and challenged him to show them a miracle. But
the Gurū condemned their wizardry and said, "The magic of the Siddhas is vain and
futile. I rely on nothing except the holy fellowship and the Word. Besides the True
Name, I possess no other miracle. " "By the Gurū's Word, " says Bhāī Gurdās,
"contentment came to the Siddhas. "
A memorial platform was raised on the site where Gurū Nānak had halted. A
small gurdwārā was raised during the eighteenth century and was attended by a line
ofmahants. According to revenue records, the Gurdwārā was owned by one Maṅgal
Siṅgh in 1892. His son, Sundar Siṅgh, succeeded him in 1904. Sundar Siṅgh's son,
Sūrat Siṅgh, was the mahant or custodian, when, around 1923, a jathā from the
nearby village of Jaito Sarjā, under the leadership of Jathedār Kesar Siṅgh occupied
the Gurdwārā and seven acres of land attached to it. Sūrat Siṅgh had offered no
resistance. Subsequent to the passing of the Sikh Gurdwārās Act, 1925, the
mangement was officially handed over to the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak
Committee on 28 April 1926. The foundation of the present building was laid on 17
October 1935. The complex, completed in 1946, consists of an 8-metre square
sanctum within a high ceilinged hall, with a gallery all around at mid height and a
pinnacled lotus dome on top. There are square domed kiosks at the corners of the
hall roof and solid lotus blossoms-in-leaves on the wall tops. Rooms for pilgrims and
the Gurū kā Laṅgar are across a brick-paved courtyard close by.
The Gurdwārā is affiliated to the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee,
but the administration has been temporarily handed over to the successors of Sant
Gurmukh Siṅgh. In addition to morning and evening services, largely-attended
congregations take place on every amāvas, the last day of the dark half of the

month. The biggest function of the year is the annual fair which now takes place
from the ninth to the eleventh day after the Dīvālī festival. The fair, although a
continuation of the time honoured pilgrimage to the Hindu temple and tank, has in
recent decades become more local in its appeal and increasingly Sikh in religious
character and attendance.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Ṭhākar Siṅgh, Giānī, Srī Gurduāre Darshan. Amritsar, 1923
Tārā Siṅgh, Srī Gur Tīrath Saṅgrahi. Amritsar, n. d.
Randhir, G. S. , Sikh Shrines in India. Delhi, 1990
John C. B. Webster

ACHCHHAR SIṄGH, JATHEDĀR (1892-1976), a Gurdwārā official and Akālī politician
who twice held office as Jathedār (provost) of Srī Akāl Takht at Amritsar, was born
on 18 January 1892 in a farming family of modest means at Ghaṇīeṅke, a village in
Lahore district. The youngest son of Hukam Siṅgh and Gaṅgī, he learnt to read
Gurmukhī letters and to recite the Scripture at the village gurdwārā. At the age of
15, he migrated to Burma, where he learnt Burmese and Urdu. As he grew up,
Achchhar Siṅgh enlisted in the Burmese military police. During World War I (191418), Burmese military police was converted into a regular army battalion and drafted
to Mesopotamia (now Iraq). Achchhar Siṅgh served there for about three years. At
the end of the war in 1918, his unit was stationed at Ṭoṅk, in the North West
Frontier Province, until its departure back to Burma in 1920. In 1919, Achchhar
Siṅgh married Mahindar Kaur of Īchogil, a village in his native district of Lahore. He
was promoted havildār, or sergeant, in 1920. The news of the Nānkāṇā Sāhib
massacre on 20 February 1921 came as a great shock to him. He resigned from the
army and, returning to the Punjab, he made a visit to Nānkāņā Sāhib to pay homage
to the memory of the martyrs. He joined the Central Mājhā Khālsā Dīwān and
plunged into the agitation for the reform of gurdwārā management. As the Akālī
campaign at Jaito started, the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee and the
Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal were outlawed on 12 October 1923, and arrests began to be
made all over the Punjab. Among those held were two successive jathedārs of the
Akāl Takht-Tejā Siṅgh Akarpurī and Ūdham Siṅgh Nāgoke. Upon the latter's arrest,
Achchhar Siṅgh was, on 10 February 1924, appointed to the high religious office.
He, too, was taken into custody on 7 May 1924, was tried and sentenced to one and
a half year in jail. Upon his release from the Central Jail at Miāṅwālī at the end of
1925, he resumed his office in Amritsar which he retained until Tejā Siṅgh Akarpurī
was set free in September 1926.
Amar Siṅgh, editor of the Sher-i-Punjab, who had been a co-prisoner in
Miāṅwālī jail and who was now president of the Lahore gurdwārā committee,
persuaded Jathedār Achchhar Siṅgh to take over as granthī at Gurdwārā Ḍehrā
Sāhib in Lahore. For 14 years he served in this position. In 1940, he moved to
Amritsar as agranthī at the Harimandar, and continued there until his resignation in
1962. From 1955 to 1962, he was also Jathedār of the Akāl Takht. During the
Punjabi Sūbā agitation, he was arrested from the premises of the Darbār Sāhib on 4
July 1955, but was released two days later. He headed the Pañj Piāre named to
judge if Master Tārā Siṅgh had not violated the vow undertaken at the Akāl Takht
before starting his fast-unto-death for the realization of the Sikh political objective of
a Punjabi-speaking state. The Pañj Piāre made a close investigation of the
circumstances leading to the abandonment of the fast and on 29 November 1961
pronounced Master Tārā Siṅgh guilty of having perjured his pledge and blemished
thereby the Sikh tradition of religious steadfastness and sacrifice. They had no
comments to make on Sant Fateh Siṅgh's fast which, they said, had been given up
under the orders of the Pañj Piāre and the saṅgat in general. He was, however, laid
under expiation for having acquiesced in Master Tārā Siṅgh breaking his fast. Master
Tārā Siṅgh was awarded a severer penance.
As the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal split into two groups, one led by Sant Fateh Siṅgh
and the other by Master Tārā Siṅgh, Jathedār Achchhar Siṅgh resigned the office of
head of the Akāl Takht to join the latter. He was elected president of this party in
November 1962. In his address at the 15th All-India Akālī Conference held under his

chairmanship at Karnāl on 7 December 1963, he pleaded for unity between the two
Akālī factions.
Jathedār Achchhar Siṅgh died in the civil hospital at Amritsar on 6 August 1976
after a protracted illness.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Sahni, Ruchi Ram, Struggle for Reform in Sikh Shrines. Ed. Ganda Singh.
Amritsar, n. d.
Gulati, Kailash Chander, The Akalis : Past and Present. Delhi, 1974
Sukhdiāl Siṅgh, Srī Akāl Takht Sāhib. Patiala, 1984
Partāp Siṅgh Giānī

ADALĪ, BHĀĪ, of Chohlā village in present-day Amritsar district of the Punjab, was a
devoted Sikh contemporary of Gurū Rām Dās and Gurū Arjan. It was, as says Bhāī
Santokh Siṅgh, Srī Gur Pratāp Sūraj Granth, under his influence that Bhāī Bidhī
Chand gave up banditry and came to receive instruction at the hands of Gurū Arjan.
Gurnek Siṅgh

ĀDAM, BHĀĪ, also mentioned as Uddam in some chronicles, was, according to Giānī
Giān Siṅgh, Twārīkh Gurū Khālsā, a Siddhū Jaṭṭ of Brāṛ clan living at Viñjhū, a village
near Baṭhiṇḍā (30º-14'N, 74º-58'E). He had no male child and, advancing in years,
he along with his wife came to Amritsar to devote himself to serving Gurū Rām Dās.
Besides partaking of the holy saṅgat morning and evening, he daily brought two
loads of firewood from the jungle, one of which he contributed to the Gurū kā
Laṅgar, selling part of the second to buy food for himself and storing the remainder.
Once on an extremely cold night a large number of Sikhs arrived to visit the Gurū.
As they stood shivering in the open, Bhāī Ādam fetched his stock of firewood and lit
bonfires for them. Gurū Rām Dās was highly pleased and bade him ask for a boon.
Ādam shyly said that he had everything he wanted except a son. The Gurū gave him
his blessing. It was, as goes the tradition, by the Gurū's blessing that Bhāī Bhagatū
was born to the couple.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Macauliffe, Max Arthur, The Sikh Religion. Oxford, 1909
Vīr Sīṅgh, Bhāī, Srī Ashṭ Gur Chamatkār. Amritsar, 1952
Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Twārīkh Gurū Khālsā. Patiala, 1970
Gurdev Siṅgh

AḌḌAṆ SHĀH, BHĀĪ (1688-1757), third in succession to Bhāī Kanhaiyā, founder of
the Sevāpanthī sect, was born in 1688 in the village of Laū in Jhaṅg district, now in
Pakistan. His parents were of a devout temperament and he inherited from them a
deeply religious bent of mind. He learnt Gurmukhī and got training in the exegesis of
Sikh scriptural texts from Bhāī Gurdās Dakkhaṇī, a leading Sikh of Gurū Tegh
Bahādur's time. He also remained in the company of Bhāī Sevā Rām, a disciple of
and successor to Bhāī Kanhaiyā, for a long time and ultimately succeeded him as
chief of the Sevāpanthī sect. Aḍḍaṇ Shāh laid down the sect's code of conduct and
prescribed for it a distinctive apparel. He also pioneered the study of comparative
religious thought at his ḍerā or monastery where nearly 250 saints were always in
residence. Besides Sikh scriptures, other important books studied at the ḍerā
included Kīmīya-i-Sa'ādat, Masnavī, and Yoga Vaśiṣṭa. These classics were translated
into Punjabi. Pāras Bhāg, a translation of Kīmīya-i-Sa'ādat still ranks as a classic of
Punjabi prose. The parchī literature issuing from this school bears testimony to the
literary taste and moral precept of Bhāī Aḍḍaṇ Shāh.
Bhāī Aḍḍaṇ Shāh was an eloquent speaker. His speeches were recorded by
Bhāī Sahaj Rām, another disciple of Bhāī Sevā Rām, which are now available under
the titles Sākhīāṅ Bhāī Aḍḍaṇ Shāh, Sukhan Fakīrāṅ De and Bachan Gobind Lokāṅ
De.
Bhāī Aḍḍaṇ Shāh spent his last years in Jammū area where he died on 17
Baisākh sudī 8, 1814 Bk/26 April 1757.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Gurmukh Siṅgh, Sevāpanthīāṅ dī Pañjābī Sāhit nūṅ Deṇ. Patiala, 1986
Lāl Chand, Srī Sant Mālā Patiala, 1955
Gurmukh Siṅgh

ADHARKĀ, according to Bhāī Bālā Janam Sākhī, visited Gurū Nānak in the train of his
master, Sālas Rāi, the jeweller. Both master and servant turned disciples and set up
a Sikh saṅgat, fellowship or centre, in their native town, Bishambharpur.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Kohlī, Surindar Siṅgh, ed. , Janam Sākhī Bhāī Bālā. Chandigarh, 1975
Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Twārīkh Gurū Khālsā. Patiala, 1970
Harbans Singh Guru Nanak and Origins of the Sikh Faith. Bombay, 1969
Gurnek Siṅgh

ĀDI GRANTH, See SRĪ GURŪ GRANTH SĀHIB

ĀDI SĀKHĪĀṄ (ādi = first; sākhīāṅ, plural of sākhī = anecdotes, stories, discourses,
parables) is one of the early compilations but not the first of the extant janam sākhī
traditions to evolve. The manuscript, dated 1758 Bk/ AD 1701, and copied by
Shambhū Nāth Brāhmaṇ was first located by Dr Mohan Siṅgh Dīwānā. While
teaching at Pañjāb University, Lahore, prior to the partition of India in 1947, Mohan
Siṅgh Dīwānā discovered in the University's Library a janam sākhī manuscript which
differed from other extant janam sākhīs and bore an earlier date. Dr Dīwānā
believed it to be a version of the earliest of all janam sākhī traditions and bestowed
on it the name Ādi Sākhīāṅ. Since then four more copies of the manuscript have
been located on the Indian side of the border by Professor Piār Siṅgh who published
in 1969 a text based on the manuscript held in the Library of Motibāgh Palace,
Paṭiālā, and supplemented by the manuscript in the Sikh Reference Library, Amritsar.
This text was issued under the title Shambhū Nāth Vālī Janam Patrī Bābe Nānak Jī Kī
Prasidh Nāṅ Ādi Sākhīān.
The fact that the two earliest of the dated manuscripts were both completed in
AD 1701 obviously implies that it is a work of the seventeenth century. It is,
however, most unlikely that the tradition in its extant form would have evolved
earlier than the mid-seventeenth century. This conclusion is indicated by such marks
of maturity as a multiplicity of sources and a coherent ordering of its various
anecdotes. Two principal sources were evidently used by the first compiler of the Ādī
Sākhīāṅ. One of these provides a link with the Purātan tradition, particularly with the
manuscript available in the Languages Department, Pāṭiālā. The other appears to
have been a manuscript, no longer extant, which was later to be used by the
compiler of the B40 Janam-sākhī. Four anecdotes have also been taken from the
Miharbān source (sākhīs 26, 27, 28a and 28b), thus introducing the goṣṭī form into
the janam sākhī. Essentially, however, the Ādī Sākhīāṅ is a collection of narrative
sākhīs and it seems clear that its first recension was exclusively narrative in content.
The goṣṭs (discourses) borrowed from the Miharbān tradition appear to be a later
supplement to an original compilation. Although the Ādī Sākhīaṅ shares an important
source with the Purātan tradition, it lacks the characteristic Purātan division of Gurū
Nanak's travels into four separate journeys known as four udāsīs. Almost all the
travel anecdotes utilized by the Ādi Sākhīāṅ compiler are drawn from his second
major source, i. e. the manuscript shared with the B40 compiler, and most of them
are presented as a single journey (sākhīs 8-16). The only exception to this pattern is
the story of Gurū Nanak's visit to Rājā Śivanābh (sākhī 21B). This also derives from
his second source, but appears in the Ādi Sākhīāṅ chronology as an isolated journey,
solely concerned with Rājā Śivanābh. In addition to these two journeys beyond the
Punjab, the manuscript also incorporates sākhīs describing Gurū Nanāk's visit to Pāk
Paṭṭan, Saidpur, and Achal (sākhīs 17, 18, 19 and 23). Towards its conclusion
(sākhīs 29-30) an element of confusion becomes evident and the identity of the
sources used for this portion is unclear. The compiler's usual care is relaxed, possibly
because of a hasty concern to terminate the work or perhaps because the
concluding portion is the work of a later, less competent contributor. The result is a
somewhat garbled account of the death of Gurū Nānak. It is, however, an
interesting account in that it draws heavily on the Miharbān tradition which was also
used in the later stages of the Bālā Janam Sākhī development.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.

Kirpāl Siṅgh, Janam Sākhī Pramparā. Patiala, 1969

2.
3.

Piār Siṅgh, ed. , Shambhū Nāth Vālī Janam Patrī Bābe Nānak Jī Kī Prasidh Nāṅ
Ādi Sākhīaṅ. Patiala, 1969
McLeod, W. H. , Early Sikh Tradition. Oxford, 1980
W. H. McLeod

ĀDĪNĀ BEG KHĀN (d. 1758), governor of the Punjab for a few months in AD 1758,
was, according to Ahwāl-i-Dīnā Beg Khān, an unpublished Persian manuscript, the
son of Channū, of the Arāīṅ agriculturalist caste, mostly settled in Doābā region of
the Punjab. He was born at the village of Sharakpur, near Lahore, now in
Sheikhūpurā district of Pakistan. Ādīnā Beg was brought up in Mughal homes, for the
most part in Jalālābād, Khānpur and Bajvāṛā in the Jalandhar Doāb. Starting his
career as a soldier, he rose to be collector of revenue of the village of Kaṅg in the
Lohīāṅ area, near Sultānpur Lodhī. He obtained half a dozen villages in Kaṅg area on
lease and within an year the entire Kaṅg region. After some time Nawāb Zakarīyā
Khān, the governor of Lahore, appointed him chief (hākam) of Sultānpur Lodhī.
When after Nādir Shāh's invasion (1739) Sikhs started gaining power, Zakarīyā Khān
made Ādīnā Beg Khān nāzim (administrator) of the Jalandhar Doāb to suppress
them. Shrewd as he was, he tried to strengthen his own position by encouraging
Sikhs instead of repressing them. Under pressure from Zakarīyā Khān, he however
had to expel them from his dominion. For non-payment of government dues he was
taken into custody under the orders of the governor of Lahore and subjected to
torture. On being set free after an year, he was appointed deputy nāzim under Shāh
Nawāz Khān. After Zakarīyā Khān's death on 1 July 1745, his sons, Yāhiyā Khān and
Shāh Nawāz Khān contested succession. Ādīnā Beg maintained good relations with
both. Shāh Nawāz Khān having captured Lahore appointed Ādīnā Beg chief of
Jalandhar Doāb. Meanwhile, Nādir Shāh died on 19 June 1747 and Ahmad Shāh
Durrānī became ruler of Kābul and Qandahār. Shāh Nawāz following Ādīnā Beg's
advice invited the Durrānī king to march towards the Punjab, warning at the same
time the government at Delhi about the Durrānī's invasion. As Ahmad Shāh
advanced into the country, Shāh Nawāz fled towards Delhi. Mu'īn ul-Mulk (Mīr
Mannū), son of Qamar ud-Dīn, the chief wazīr of the Delhi king, succeeded in
checking the invader at Mānūpur, near Sirhind. Ādīnā Beg joined hands with Mū'īn
ul-Mulk and was wounded in the battle. Mū'īn ul-Mulk became governor of Lahore,
with Kauṛā Mall as hisdīwān and Ādīnā Beg asfaujdār of the Jalandhar Doāb as
before. Sikhs again started plundering the country. Ahmad Shāh Durrānī launched
upon his third incursion into the Punjab (December 1751), this time forcing Mu'īn ulMulk to surrender. Mu'īn remained governor, now on the Durrānī's behalf. He and
Ādīnā Beg directed their energies towards quelling the Sikhs. On the festival of Holā
Mohallā in March 1753, Ādīnā Beg fell upon Sikh pilgrims at Anandpur killing a large
number of them. The Sikhs retaliated by plundering villages in the Jalandhar and
Bārī Doābs. Ādīnā Beg was as quick in coming to terms as he was in opening
hostilities. He assigned some of the revenue of his territory to the Sikhs and
admitted several of them, including Jassā Sīṅgh Rāmgaṛhīā, into his army.
Mu'īn ul-Mulk died on 3 November 1753, and during the time of his widow,
Murād Begam (Mughlānī Begam), Ādīnā Beg assumed independent authority in the
Doāb, extending his influence up to Sirhind (March 1755). The Emperor of Delhi
bestowed on him the title of Zafar Jaṅg Khān. The ruler of Kāṅgṛā accepted his
overlordship. In May 1756, he was appointed governor of Lahore and Multān by the
Mughal government of Delhi on payment of an annual tribute of thirty lakh of
rupees. Ahmad Shāh Durrānī came to Mughlānī Begam's help and Ādīnā Beg took
refuge in the Śivālik hills. The Afghāns reappointed him faujdār of the Jalandhar
Doāb. During Taimūr Shāh's governorship (1757-58), Ādīnā Beg began to look
around for allies with a view to expelling the Afghāns. The Sikhs and Ādīnā Beg's
troops joined hands and defeated the Afghāns at Māhalpur, in Hoshiārpur district.
Ādīnā Beg expressed his gratitude to the Sikhs by presenting a sum of a thousand

rupees as homage to the Gurū Granth Sāhib and a lakh and a quarter as protection
money for the Jalandhar Doāb. Keeping up appearances with the Sikh sardārs, He
wished to weaken their power and invited to this end Marāṭhās who had taken Delhi
to come to the Punjab, offering them one lakh of rupees a day on march. He also
persuaded Sikhs to help the Marāṭhās against the Afghāns. The Marāṭhās led by
Raghunāth Rāo and accompanied by the forces of the Sikhs and those of Ādīnā Beg
entered Lahore in April 1758. Ādīnā Beg got the sūbahdārī of the Punjab at 75 lakh
of rupees a year to be paid to the Marāṭhās. The Punjab had now three masters :
the Mughals, the Afghāns and the Marāṭhās, but in reality only two--Ādīnā Beg and
the Sikhs. Ādīnā Beg brooked no rivals, and resumed his campaign against the Sikhs,
increasing his armed strength and hiring a thousand woodcutters to clear up the
forests in which the Sikhs were wont to seek shelter in times of stress. He laid siege
to the Sikh fort of Rām Rauṇi at Amritsar. Before the Sikhs rallied to confront him,
Ādīnā Beg succumbed to an attack of colic at Baṭālā on 10 September 1758. His
dead body was buried, honouring his will, at Khānpur, 2 km northwest of
Hoshiārpur.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Gupta, Hari Ram, History of the Sikhs, vol. II. Delhi, 1978
Gandhi, Surjit Singh, Struggle of the Sikhs for Sovereignty. Delhi, 1980
Bhagat Singh, Sikh Polity. Delhi, 1978
Bhagat Siṅgh

ĀḌIT, a professional soldier of Soinī clan, came to take refuge at the feet of Gurū
Arjan. He supplicated the Gurū thus : "We soldiers bear arms and live by fighting.
How shall we be saved?" The Gurū, according to Bhāī Manī Siṅgh, Sikhāṅ dī Bhagat
Mālā, said : "Remember God even when fighting. Fight only in a righteous cause.
Protect the weak and the oppressed. Be true to the salt; be loyal to your Master.
Thus will you obtain victory; thus will you glorify your countenance. " Āḍit bowed at
the Gurū's feet and became a disciple.
Tāran Siṅgh

ADVENTURES OF AN OFFICER IN THE PUNJUB (2 vols.) by Major H. M. L. Lawrence,
under the pseudonym of Bellasis, published in AD 1846 by Henry Colburn, London,
and reprinted in 1970 by the Languages Department, Punjab, Paṭiālā. The book
which is a rambling account, half fact half fiction, of the author's adventures,
provides information about the rise of the Sikhs and about the person and
government of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh. This is "a dose of history, which the reader
may read or not, as he pleases" (p. 236), mixed with scandal and bazaar gossip.
Colonel Bellasis, a soldier of fortune, enters the Punjab with a small suite,
arrives at Lahore and meets the leading courtiers of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh, including
the Faqīr brothers, 'Azīz ud-Dīn and Nūr ud-Din. He was introduced to the court by
the latter. The Mahārājā gave him appointment assūbahdār of Kāṅgṛā. In his book,
the author describes some of the men around the Mahārājā. For instance, Dhiān
Siṅgh:" a fine looking man, of a noble presence, polite and affable, of winning
manners and modest speech" (p. 35). Khushāl Siṅgh: "a coarse, vulgar-looking man.
. . was once sent to assist Kunwar Sher Singh the Maharaja's son, in the government
of Kashmir, and to recover its ruined finances. . . recovered some rents, screwed a
few lakhs and turned a season of dearth into one of most frightful famine. . . " (p.
38). Khaṛak Siṅgh: "the eldest [of the three princes] is an imbecile, and affects the
religieux" (p. 53). Avitabile: "a wild bull in a net, " he "acts as a savage among
savage men" (p. 43). The author draws numerous pen portraits of the Mahārājā as
well : "Of mean appearance, one eyed, and small of stature. . . Wholly illiterate but
gifted with great natural intelligence, and a wonderfully quick apprehension and
retentive memory, he manages, better than those more learned, to transact the
current business of the kingdom" (p. 29).
Referring to the revenue and the judicial administration of the Kingdom, the
author observes that the whole country was farmed out, two-fifths of the produce
being taken by the State. The revenue-farmer was also judge, magistrate and often
customs master, within his area of jurisdiction. Adālat, court, was another rich
source of revenue, fine being the punishment awarded in almost every case (p. 51).
Customs brought a revenue of 24, 00, 000 rupees to the treasury, Amritsar alone
yielding 9, 00, 000.
B. J. Hasrat

AFGHĀN-SIKH RELATIONS spanning the years 1748 to 1849 go back to the first
invasion of India by Ahmad Shāh Durrānī, although he must have heard of the Sikhs
when in 1739 he accompanied Nādir Shāh, the Iranian invader, as a young staff
officer. Having occupied Lahore after a minor engagement fought on 11 January
1748 during his first invasion of India, Ahmad Shāh advanced towards Sirhind to
meet a Mughal army which he was informed was advancing from Delhi to oppose
him. On the way he had two slight skirmishes at Sarāi Nūr Dīn and at the Vairovāl
ferry, both in present-day Amritsar district, with a Sikh jathā or fighting band under
Jassā Siṅgh Āhlūvālīā. While lying in wait at Sirhind between 2 and 11 March 1748
for a Mughal force, Ālā Siṅgh, leader of the Mālvā Sikhs, cut off his supplies of food
and fodder. Ahmad Shāh, defeated in the battle of Mānūpur fought on 11 March,
retraced his steps homewards. Sikhs harassed the retreating invader between the
Sutlej and the Chenāb, Chaṛhat Siṅgh Sukkarchakkīā following him even up to the
Indus, relieving him of a number of weapons, horses and camels.
Ahmad Shāh's subsequent invasions in a way helped the Sikhs to increase and
consolidate their power. Anticipating a second invasion towards the close of 1748,
the new Mughal governor of the Punjab, Mīr Mu'īn ul-Mulk (Mīr Mannū, in shortened
form in Sikh chronicles), tried to conciliate Sikhs through his minister, Dīwān Kauṛā
Mall, and granted them one-fourth of the revenue of the parganah of Paṭṭī, but the
truce did not last long and during the second Durrānī invasion (December 1749February 1750), the Sikhs made bold to enter and plunder Lahore itself. During
Ahmad Shāh's next invasion (December 1751-March 1752), Kauṛā Mall again enlisted
the help of several thousand Sikh warriors under the command of Saṅgat Siṅgh and
Sukkhā Siṅgh of Māṛī Kambo. The latter was killed in a sudden skirmish with the
invaders. As a result of this invasion the provinces of Lahore and Multān were
annexed to the Afghān empire, although Mīr Mannū remained governor of these
provinces on Ahmad Shāh Durrānī's behalf. This meant that Sikhs had now to
contend with Afghāns as well as with Mughals. The disorder which overtook the
Punjab following the death of Mīr Mannū in November 1753 opened the way for
them to establish their sway over vast tracts in the form of rākhī (q. v.) system
under which local populations sought their protection on payment of a portion of
their land revenue. During his fourth invasion (November 1756-April 1757), the
Afghān invader had reached as far as the Mughal capital, Delhi. The Sikhs preyed
upon him during his onward march and, when his son Prince Taimūr was
transporting the plundered wealth of Delhi to Lahore, Ālā Siṅgh in concert with other
Sikh sardārs barred his path at Sanaur, near Paṭiala, and robbed him of his
treasures, and again attacked and plundered him at Malerkoṭlā. Prince Taimūr gave
vent to his chagrin by destroying Sikh shrines at Kartārpur, 15 km northwest of
Jalandhar, and subjecting its residents to indiscriminate massacre and plunder.
Ahmad Shāh, during his brief stay at Lahore, sent out troops who sacked Amritsar
and desecrated the sacred pool, besides killing a large number of Sikhs. He left his
son Taimūr and his general Jahān Khān in charge of the Punjab and himself retired
to Afghanistan. The two deputies were expelled from Punjab by Sikhs in 1758 with
the help of the Marāṭhās and of Ādīnā Beg Khān, who was rewarded with the
governorship of the province.
During Ahmad Shāh's fifth invasion (October 1759-May 1761), while the
Marāṭhās retired from the Punjab without resistance, the Sikhs gave a battle to the
invader in the neighbourhood of Lahore in which the Afghān lost as many as 2, 000
men, with their general Jahān Khān wounded. The Marāṭhā's dream of supremacy in

north India was shattered in the third battle of Pānīpat (14 January 1761). The Sikhs
on the other hand were emboldened to raid Lahore in November 1760. They stayed
there for eleven days and the Afghān deputy appeased them with a present of Rs
30, 000 for sacramental kaṛāhprasād. They harassed the Afghān chief of Chahār
Mahāl and sacked Jalandhar, Sirhind and Mālerkoṭlā. In November 1761, they
captured Lahore and struck their own coin. Ahmad Shāh, on hearing of these
developments, hurried to the relief of his deputies. Sikhs retreated as he marched
upon them, but were overtaken near Kup and Rahīṛā villages, near Mālerkoṭlā, on
the morning of 5 February 1762. About 25, 000 Sikhs were killed in the day-long
battle known in Sikh annals as Vaḍḍā Ghallūghārā or the great holocaust. On his
return he blew up the holy Harimandar at Amritsar with gunpowder. The Sikhs
retaliated with attacks on Sirhind in May 1762. They freely roamed around Lahore
during July-August 1762 and celebrated Dīvālī at Amritsar in defiance of the Shāh
who was still present in the Punjab.
After the departure of the Durrānī in December 1762, Sikhs sacked the Afghān
principality of Kasūr in May 1763, overran Jalandhar Doāb during June, defeated in
November near Wazīrābād an expeditionary force sent by Ahmad Shāh and invested
Mālerkoṭlā, killing its Afghān chief, Bhīkhan Khān (December 1763). They followed
these successes with the reduction of Moriṇḍā and Sirhind in January 1764. Zain
Khān, the faujdār or governor of Sirhind, was killed, and the territories of Sirhind
sarkār or district were appropriated by various Sikh misls or chiefships. The Dal
Khālsā Jīo, as the, confederated force was called, then fell upon the territories of
Najīb ud-Daulah, a powerful Ruhīlā Afghān chief and Ahmad Shāh Durrānī's regent in
India. Ransacking Sahāranpur on 20 February 1764, they pushed on seizing Shāmlī,
Kāndhlā, Muzaffarnagar, Morādābād, Najībābād and several other towns. Najīb udDaulah, unable to meet the Sikhs in battle, paid them Rs 11, 00, 000, inducing them
to return to Punjab by the end of February 1764. While the Buḍḍhā Dal, a division of
the Dal Khālsā under Jassā Siṅgh Āhlūvālīā, was thus engaged in the Gangetic Doāb,
its younger counterpart, the Taruṇā Dal, was active in the central and western
Punjab. Lahore was attacked in February 1764 and its governor, Kābulī Mall, saved it
from plunder only by paying a large sum to the Sikhs, by accepting a nominee of
Harī Siṅgh of the Bhaṅgīmisl as a resident at his court and allowing an agent of
Sobhā Siṅgh of the Kanhaīyā misl to receive customs duty on all goods coming from
the side of Multān. During April-June 1764, the Bhaṅgī and Nakaī sardārs captured
the Lammā country lying between Lahore and Multān, and Chaṛhat Siṅgh
Sukkarchakkīā took Rohtās in the north. Ahmad Shāh Durrānī came out again, in
December 1764, but harassed by Sikhs, he was forced to return homewards without
reaching Delhi. On his way back, realizing the futility of appointing his own
governors in the Punjab, he recognized Ālā Siṅgh of Paṭiālā as the ruling chief in
Sirhind territory and bestowed upon him the title of Rājā, with tabl-o-'alum (drum
and banner). He, however, sent back Kābulī Mall to resume governorship of Lahore,
but before the latter could reach the city, the Sikhs had occupied it (17 April 1765).
Ahmad Shāh made yet another (his last) bid to regain Punjab and Delhi during the
winter of 1766-67, but failed. He died at Qandahār on 23 October 1772.
Ahmad Shāh's son and successor, Taimūr Shāh (1746-93), attempted five
successive incursions, but could not reach Lahore. His successor, Shāh Zamān, also
made several attempts to regain a foothold in India and did enter Lahore twice
(January 1797; December 1798) but was forced to evacuate it within a few weeks
on each occasion.

Raṇjīt Siṅgh, the chief of the Sukkarchakkīā misl of the Dal Khālsā was
destined finally to clear Punjab of the Afghāns. He became master of Lahore on 7
July 1799. The provinces of Kashmīr and Multān were still ruled by Afghān satraps
and Peshāwar across the Indus was directly under Kābul which, however, was
weakened by internal dissensions. Shāh Zamān was deposed and blinded in 1800
and the throne was seized by his brother, Mahmūd Shāh, with the help of a Bārakzaī
chief, Fateh Khān who emerged as the king maker. In 1803, Fateh Khān discarded
Mahmūd in favour of Shujā' ul-Mulk, better known as Shāh Shujā', another brother
of Shāh Zamān, but in 1809 Mahmūd was reinstated and Shāh Shujā' shifted to
Peshāwar. The latter met Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh at Khushāb in 1810 in the hope of
obtaining Sikh help. He tried to recover his kingdom with the help of 'Atā
Muhammad Khān, governor of Kashmīr, who had not accepted the authority of
Wazīr Fateh Khān and had been ruling the province independently since 1809. The
attempt failed and ended in Shāh Shujā' taken captive in Kashmīr and his family
including the ill-fated Shāh Zamān seeking refuge in Lahore. Wafā Begam, the senior
wife of Shāh Shujā', approached Raṇjīt Siṅgh through his trusted courtiers, Dīwān
Mohkam Chand and Faqir 'Azīz ud-Dīn, to have her husband rescued from Kashmīr.
Wazīr Fateh Khān also solicited the Mahārājā's aid in the reduction of Kashmīr
promising him one-third of the spoils. The joint expedition launched in 1812 was not
a complete success. Fateh Khān refused to part with the promised share of the
booty, but the Sikh general Mohkam Chand succeeded in bringing Shāh Shujā' to
Lahore and Raṇjīt Siṅgh acquired the coveted diamond, Koh-i-Nūr. Kashmīr too was
conquered and annexed to the Sikh kingdom in 1819.
Multān which had been retaken from the Sikhs by Taimūr Shāh in 1780 had
been placed under his nephew Nawāb Muzaffar Khān. Repeated expeditions sent by
Raṇjīt Siṅgh against him (in 1802, 1805, 1807, 1810, 1812 and 1815) had proved
abortive. Multān ultimately fell to the Sikhs in June 1818. On 19 November of that
year, Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh entered Peshāwar, the eastern citadel of the rulers of
Kābul. With the conquest of Ḍerā Ghāzī Khān in 1820 and Ḍerā Ismā'īl Khān in 1821,
the frontiers of the Sikh kingdom had been pushed far to the west of the River
Indus. The Pāṭhans (Afghāns) of this frontier region, however, had not fully
accepted Sikh authority. In 1826, they under the leadership of Sayyid Ahmad, a
Wahābī fanatic, rose in jihād or holy war against the Sikhs. The campaign, a
prolonged one, came to an end with the death of the Sayyid in May 1831. In 1835,
Dost Muhammad Khān, the youngest and the most energetic of the Bārakzaī
brothers, who had supplanted the Durrānī dynasty and become Amīr (lord, chief or
king) of Kābul in 1825, advanced up to Khaibār Pass threatening to recover
Peshāwar. In 1836 Harī Siṅgh Nalvā, the Sikh general who along with Prince Nāu
Nihāl Siṅgh was guarding that frontier, built a chain of forts including one at Jamrūd
at the eastern end of the Khaibār Pass to defend it. Dost Muhammad erected a fort
at 'Alī Masjid at the other end. In the beginning of 1837, as Prince Nan Nihāl Siṅgh
returned to Lahore to get married and the Mahārājā and his court got busy with
preparations for the wedding, Dost Muhammad Khān sent a 25, 000-strong force,
including a large number of local irregulars and equipped with 18 heavy guns, to
invest Jamrūd. The Sikh garrison there had only 600 men and a few light artillery
pieces. The Afghāns besieged the fort and cut off its water supply while a
detachment was sent to the neighbouring Sikh fort of Shabqadar to prevent any help
from that direction. Mahā Siṅgh, the garrison commander of Jamrūd, kept the
invaders at bay for four days and managed meanwhile to send a desperate appeal
for help to Harī Siṅgh Nalvā at Peshāwar. Nalvā rose from his sickbed and rushed to

Jamrūd. In the final battle fought on 30 April 1837, the Afghāns were driven away,
but Harī Siṅgh Nalvā was mortally wounded. In 1838, the Sikh monarch became a
party to the Tripartite Treaty as a result of which Shāh Shujā' was reinstalled on the
throne of Kābul in August 1839 with British help. Dost Muhammad Khān was exiled
to Calcutta in November 1839, but was restored to his former position after the
murder of Shāh Shujā' in April 1842. He thereafter maintained cordial relations with
the Lahore Darbār. The second Anglo-Sikh war reawakened Dost Muhammad's
ambition to seize Peshāwar and the trans-Indus territories, although overtly he
sympathized with the Sikhs and even hired out an irregular Afghān contingent of
1500 horse to Chatar Siṅgh, leader of Sikh resistance against the British.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Shahamat Ali, The Sikhs and Afghans. Patiala, 1970
Harlan, Josiah, A Memoir of India and Afghanistan. London, 1842
Burnes, Alexander, Cabool. London, 1843,
Ganda Singh, Ahmad Shah Durrani. Bombay, 1959
Sūrī, Sohan Lāl, 'Umdāt-ut-Twārīkh. Lahore, 1885-89
B. J. Hasrat

AGAMPUR or AGAMPURĀ, lit. city unapproachable or inaccessible (Skt. agamya plus
pur or purā). The word appears in one of the hymns of Gurū Nānak in Āsā measure
where it is used to signify God's abode or the ultimate state or stage of spiritual
enlightenment and bliss. Another term used synonymously in the same hymn is
nijaghar, lit. one's own real home signifying the ultimate sphere of jīvātmā. The
relevant stanza first raises the question :"Tell me how the city unapproachable is
reached, " followed by the answer, "By discarding such measures as japu
(mechanical repetition of God's name), tapu (bodily mortification) and haṭh nigrahi
(forced control of the senses). " Realizing the Gurū's Word in practice is prescribed
as the right path to agampur (GG, 436).
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Shabdārth Srī Gurū Granth Sāhib Jī, Amritsar, 1959
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AGAUL, village 10 km from Nābhā (30º 22'N, 76º 9'E) in Paṭiālā district, has a
historical shrine called Gurdwārā Srī Gurū Tegh Bahādur Sāhib. In the course of a
journey through this area, Gurū Tegh Bahādur came and sat here under a pīpal tree
on the bank of a pond. The old pīpal tree is not there now, but the pond, called Rām
Talāī and believed to possess medicinal properties for curing skin diseases, has since
been lined and converted into a small sarovar, holy tank. Construction of the
Gurdwārā was commenced in 1919 and completed on 1 Chet 1992 Bk/14 March
1935. The building comprises a square dīvān hall, which is an extension of the
sanctum where the Gurū Granth Sāhib is installed. The Gurdwārā is managed by a
village committee. There is a lithographed copy of the Gurū Granth Sāhib preserved
in the Gurdwārā, printed in Nānak Shāhī Sammat 424 (AD 1893). It has 2134 pages
and the volume ends with the Rāgamālā with which composition copies of the holy
Scripture as a rule conclude.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Faujā Siṅgh, Gurū Tegh Bahādur, Yātrā Asthān, Pramprāvāṅ te Yād Chinn. Patiala,
1976
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AGHAṚ SIṄGH (d. 1764) was, according to Giānī Giān Siṅgh, Panth Prakāsh, one of
the seven sons of Bhāī Nagāhīā, a Dullaṭ Jaṭṭ of Lauṅgovāl, in present-day Saṅgrūr
district of the Punjab. He received amrit, the Khālsā rites of initiation, from his uncle
Bhāī Manī Siṅgh, then high priest of the Harimandar at Amritsar. He, along with his
brother Tharāj Siṅgh, fought against the Mughals in Amritsar and avenged the
execution of Bhāī Manī Siṅgh by slaying his tormentors. He also confronted and
killed Mīr Momin Khān of Kasūr who, after the death in November 1753 of Mīr
Mannū, the governor of the Punjab, had launched a renewed campaign of
persecution against the Sikhs.
Aghaṛ Siṅgh died in January 1764 at Sirhind fighting against the provincial
governor, Zain Khān.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Panth Prakāsh. Patiala, 1970
Piār Siṅgh

AGHORĪ or AGHORPANTHĪ, one of the several Kāpālika sects, connected with the
Tāntrik cult of Śaivism, notorious for its cannibalism and other abominable practices.
Aghora literally means "not terrible, " "not evil, " otherwise, "pleasant" or
"handsome, " and is one of the euphemistic titles of the Hindu god, Śiva. Aughaṛ or
Aughaḍa is another cognate word which stands for a follower of the Aghorpanth.
Besides, there is also a Vaiṣṇava sect of Aghorīs of modern origin, said to have been
founded by Bābā Kinārāma (1684-1787) who himself was a disciple of Bābā
Kālārāma Aghorī of Vārāṇasī.
With no independent canonical text or organized church of their own, the
Aghorīs derive their ideas and beliefs from those of Kāpālikas who are also known as
Vāmachārī Śaivites. Their chosen deity is Śiva or Aghora whose blessings they seek
by following a degenerate and crude form of yoga. They practise a kind of divination
by the examination of a child cut out of a pregnant woman at full time. They offer
human sacrifices, generally, of volunteering victims who, immediately after they
volunteer, become sacred and they are provided whatever they desire. On the
appointed day and at a special ceremony, the volunteering victim is decapitated or
slain by having a dagger struck in his throat. His blood and flesh are then consumed
by the Aghorīs present.
The Aghorīs worship Aghorīśvara as the one Supreme Reality. Ethically, they
believe that everything is good for a good person. Distinction between the pure and
the impure is irrelevant from their standpoint. Their way of life is absolutely
unconventional and the people in general feel much impressed and scared by their
occult powers, their practice of human sacrifices, austerities, disregard for fame and
wealth, indifference to cleanliness of food and their fearful dress. Living almost
naked, they besmear their bodies with the ashes taken from funeral pyres. They
wear the rosary made up of Rudrākṣa beads and a necklace made of the bones of a
snake and the tusks of a wild boar. Some members of this sect wear necklaces made
of human teeth. They invariably carry a skull in hand. They eat flesh from human
corpses and animal carcasses except those of horses. They are even said to eat their
own excretions. Sexual act with a woman is considered a symbolic way of union with
the goddess. Their rituals are generally performed at cemeteries.
In the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth century, strict measures
were adopted by the government to curb the Aghorīs and their practices which led
to the gradual decline in their number. Only a very small number of Aghorīs exist
today and they are generally confined to concentrations in Bengal, Bihār and Eastern
U. P.
In the Bālā Janam Sākhī, the story is related of Gurū Nānak's encounter with a
demon called Kauḍā. From the story it appears that Kauḍā was a Kāpālika Aghorī.
Once travelling through Central India, Gurū Nānak, accompanied by Mardānā,
passed through the tribal areas ministering to communities primitive in their ways.
In this country, Mardānā once wandered out in search of food and was seized by a
marauding giant. His name, as mentioned inBālā Janam Sākhī, was Kauḍā. He was
the leader of a clan of cannibals and always kept an oil cauldron sizzling for man or
beast that might fall into his hands. Mardānā would have met the fate of Kauḍa's
many other luckless victims but for the Gurū's timely appearance. The Gurū uttered
the greeting, "Sat Kartār--the Creator is the eternal truth. " The ring of his words
startled Kauḍā. When he turned to look towards the Gurū, his heart was touched as

never before. He had not known such benignity and tenderness, nor such calm and
tranquillity. He released Mardānā and fell at the Gurū's feet. He was, saysBālā Janam
Sākhī, converted and charged with the rescuing of his companions. It is stated that
Gurū Nānak and Mardānā stayed with Kauḍā for seven days.
Kāmākhyā (Assam), - Vārāṇasī, Ujjain, Girnār and Mount Ābū were some of the
well known centres of Aghorī ascetics.
Bābā Kinārāma, a latter-day leader of the sect, was a Vaiṣṇava devotee whose
teachings, like those of the medieval sants, are a mixture of Vaiṣṇava bhaktī and
Siddha culture. He wrote Rāmagītā, Rāmacapeṭā, Rāmarasāla, Gītāvalī and
Vivekasāra. A versified translation of the Yogavasiṣṭha is also attributed to him. Most
of these texts expound Vaiṣṇavite piety of the sant variety. In the Gītāvalī, he
stresses the soteriological importance of satyaśabda (the divine/true word) which
incidentally is a point of convergence with Sikhism. Vivekasāra, his most important
work, discusses the theological and moral ideas of the sect, such as creation of the
world, self-introspection, meditation, sahaja-samādhī, satsang and the ecstatic or
mystical experience born of supreme devotion and sādhānā.
The term aghorī or ghorī has passed into popular Punjabi usage standing for
one who is indolent of habit and indifferent in matters of personal hygiene and
cleanliness.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Crooke, W. , "Aghoris", in The Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, vol. I. Ed.
James Hastings. Edinburgh, 1964
Eliade, Mircea, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom. Princeton, 1969
Chaturvedī, Parśūrām, Uttarī Bhārat kī Sant Pramprā. Allahabad, 1963
Kohlī, Surindar Siṅgh, ed. , Janam Sākhī Bhāī Bālā. Chandigarh, 1975
L. M. Joshi

AGNEW, PATRICK ALEXANDER VANS (1822-1848), a civil servant under the East
India Company. He was the son of Lt-Col Patrick Vans Agnew, an East India
Company director. Agnew joined the Bengal civil service in March 1841. In 1842, he
became assistant to the commissioner of Delhi division. In December 1845, he was
appointed assistant to Major George Broadfoot, the superintendent of the cis-Sutlej
states. He was present at the battle of Sabhrāoṅ in 1846. In April 1848, he was sent
by the British resident at Lahore, the capital of the Sikh kingdom of the Punjab, to
Multān to take over the government of that province from Dīwān Mūl Rāj who had
resigned. He was accompanied by Lt William Anderson, of the Bengal army, the new
governor-designate Kāhn Siṅgh, and an escort of Sikh troops from Lahore. The party
reached Multān on 17 April 1848. Dīwān Mūl Rāj called on them the following day,
but a dispute arose as Agnew demanded that accounts for the preceding six years
be produced. On 19 April, the two English officers were taken round the fort and the
various establishments. As they were returning to their camp, both Agnew and
Anderson were attacked and wounded by a retainer of Dīwān Mūl Rāj. Soon
afterwards, Mūl Rāj's troops rose in arms and took him prisoner, thus preventing him
from visiting the wounded officers in the British camp at the Īdgāh.
The Multān troops called a council of war on 20 April and issued proclamations
in the name of Mūl Rāj, inviting the people to rise against the British. The same day,
the Sikh escort from Lahore rebelled. Kāhn Siṅgh made terms for himself. In the
evening both Agnew and Anderson were killed at the Īdgāh.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Bal, S. S. , British Policy Towards the Panjab, 1844-49. Calcutta, 1971
Kohli, Sita Ram, Trial of Diwan Mul Raj. Patiala, 1971
Edwardes, Herbert, A Year on the Punjab Frontier in 1848-49. London, 1851
Harī Rām Gupta

ĀGRĀ (27º-10'N, 78º-0'E), became the seat of a Sikh saṅgat following a visit by
Gurū Nānak during the first of his four long preaching journeys. Later, Gurū Rām
Dās, in his early career as Bhāī Jeṭhā, was in Āgrā when he attended Akbar's court
on behalf of Gurū Amar Dās, Nānak III. Gurū Tegh Bahādur, Nānak IX, passed
through the city on his way to the eastern parts in 1665-66. Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, the
last of the Gurūs, also visited Āgrā when he met Emperor Bahādur Shāh in 1707-08.
GURDWĀRĀ MĀĪ THĀN, marking Gurū Tegh Bahādur's second visit to Āgrā, is
the only historical Sikh shrine in the city. It is said that Māī Jassī, an old lady who
was a devout follower of the Sikh faith, had got a length of linen prepared from yarn
spun with her own hands and had ever longed for an opportunity to present it to the
Gurū in her own home. Gurū Tegh Bahādur did visit Māī Jassī's house in the heart of
Āgrā and received the offering. He was pleased with her devotion and, as a parting
boon, pronounced the blessing that her name would live forever. Māī Jassī's house is
now a gurdwārā. It is known by the name of Māī Thān. By this name is also known
the mahallā in which it is situated.
Gurdwārā Māī Thān, in a narrow lane, has a spacious square dīvān hall, with
the Gurū Granth Sāhib seated in the centre on a canopied throne of white marble. In
a room above the entrance gate, a museum has been established with pictures
depicting scenes from Sikh history, especially martyrdoms. The Gurdwārā, registered
as the Srī Gurū Siṅgh Sabhā, is managed by Srī Gurū Tegh Bahādur Central Board,
Āgrā.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Tārā Siṅgh, Srī Gur Tīrath Saṅgrahi. Amritsar, n. d.
Ṭhākar Siṅgh, Giānī, Srī Gurduāre Darshan. Amritsar, 1923.
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

ĀGYĀ KAUR, BĪBĪ (d. 1918), wife of Bhāī Takht Siṅgh and his helpmate in promoting
women's education among Sikhs to which cause he was passionately devoted, was
the daughter of Sardār Ṭek Siṅgh of the village of Sultānpur, near Rahīm Yār Khān
railway station in the princely state of Bahāwalpur. She had been a resident student
at the Sikh girls school, at Fīrozpur, founded in 1892 and nurtured by Bhāī Takht
Siṅgh. Āgyā Kaur had studied at the Mahāvidyālā up to the high school level. Bhāī
Takht Siṅgh's first wife Harnām Kaur who was a co-builder of the school died in
1906. He approached Āgyā Kaur's father to ask for her hand to be his ally in the
enterprise he had launched upon. The nuptials took place at Sultānpur on 17
September 1910. On 16-17 February 1911, Bībī (lady) Āgyā Kaur left with her
husband on a tour of some South Asian countries to raise funds for the school. At
Sikh gatherings and at dīvāns at the gurdwārās, she recited holy hymns, kīrtan, and
made fervent appeals for donations, for their nascent school. Returning to Punjab on
3 March 1912, she resumed her duties at the Mahāvidyālā as a teacher and as a
matron of the hostel. She was taken ill with influenza during the epidemic of 1918,
aggravated in her case by an attack of pneumonia. She died on 27 October 1918.
She left behind four children, one of her daughters rising to the position of Director
of Public Instruction in Punjab.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Pañjābī Bhaiṇ. Firozpur, September 1910 and December 1918
Silver Jubilee Book. Amritsar, 1935
Dīwān Siṅgh Bhallā

ĀGYĀ RĀM, BHĀĪ (Bhāī Āgyā Siṅgh, according to Sukhā Siṅgh, Gurbilās Dasvīṅ
Pātshāhī), a Sikh of Delhi, who accompanied Bhāī Jaitā, Bhāī Nānū and Bhāī Ūdā to
carry from Chāndnī Chowk in Delhi to the Dilvālī Mahallā the severed head of Gurū
Tegh Bahādur who was executed there on 11 November 1675. Bhāī Jaitā and Bhāī
Gurbakhsh were among the eye witnesses to this gruesome happening. According to
Gurū kīāṅ Sākhīāṅ, they returned to their homes muttering: "Glory be unto the Gurū
glory unto his Sikhs. " As the sad word spread, Sikhs poured one by one into Dilvālī
Mahallā and congregated in the house of Bhāī Nānū. There they sat far into the
evening listening to the woeful narration and making plans to rescue the body.
Lakkhī Dās Lubāṇa's caravan of bullock- carts had arrived on that day from Nārnaul.
Bhāī Āgyā Rām, along with Bhāī Jaitā, Bhāī Nānū and Bhāī Ūdā, hid himself in the
wagons near the Fort and reached the kotwālī, in Chāndnī Chowk. According to
tradition, the severed head was kept for the night in Bhāī Jaitā's house in Dilvālī
Mahallā from where he carried his sacred charge to Anandpur where Gurū Gobind
Siṅgh, the spiritual successor to Gurū Tegh Bahādur, then lived and where the
obsequies were performed, with dignity and reverence, on 16 November 1675.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Padam, Piārā Siṅgh, and Giānī Garjā Siṅgh, eds. , Gurū kīāṅ Sākhīāṅ. Patiala,
1986
Trilochan Siṅgh, Guru Tegh Bahadur : Prophet and Martyr. Delhi, 1967
Harbans Singh, Guru Tegh Bahadur. Delhi, 1982
Gurcharan Siṅgh Giānī

AHAṄKĀR (haṅkār as it is commonly pronounced in Punjabi) is a compound of
Sanskrit aham ('I') and kār ('maker') and means I-maker, i. e. what individuates the
person as 'I'. It stands for egotism, egoism, self-conceit, self-centeredness, vanity or
simply pride. Other synonyms used in the sacred texts of the Sikhs are mān,
abhimān, garab, gumān, ahaṅg, ahammeu, ahambudh, haumaiandkhudī. Pride is
regarded as an undesirable trait in all ethical systems; it is counted among the seven
deadly sins in the religious literature of the West. Sikhism considers it not as a
metaphysical myth as is done in Sāṅkhya and Buddhism but as one of the five
common human weaknesses or evils. Ahaṅkār is vanity, elation or exultation arising
from an exaggerated view of one's own merit. The merit may consist in real or
presumed intellect, scholarship, physical strength or beauty, worldly rank and
possessions or even spiritual accomplishments. Whatever the source, ahaṅkār is
counted a frailty. Says Gurū Amar Dās, "it is a deadly disease and the cause of the
unending cycle of birth, death and rebirth" (GG, 592). Again, "Pelf is like poison, for
it engenders arrogance. None sunk in arrogance wins approval" (GG, 666). In
another hymn, Gurū Amar Dās declares: "Egoity is the adversary of nām (absorption
in God's Name); the two cannot abide together" (GG, 560). Gurū Arjan thus
addresses ahaṅkār personified : " O thou, the cause of birth and death: O thou, the
soul of sin: Thou forsakest friends and sowest enmities: Thou spreadest the net of
illusion far and wide” (GG, 1358). Even virtues and pieties are rendered sterile if
accompanied by ahaṅkār, as says Gurū Tegh Bahādur, Nānak IX : "Pilgrimages,
fasting and charities if they lead to gumān (pride) go waste like the bath by an
elephant (who after bathing besmears his body with dirt)" (GG, 1428).
Remedies suggested in Sikhism are humility and sevā (self abnegating deeds
of voluntary service). The two are complementary virtues. For Gurū Arjan humility is
a weapon against not only ahaṅkār but all vikārs or evil tendencies. Says he,
"Humility is my mace, being the dust of the feet of all, my dagger. These weapons
vanquish all vices" (GG, 628): Sevā is a highly prized virtue in Sikhism. To quote
Gurū Arjan again : "I feel blest rendering service to God's servants by drawing water
for them (from the well), by swinging the fan over their heads (in holy congregation)
and by grinding corn (for their meals). State, territory and mundane offices are of
little value" (GG, 811). Another remedy is to be aware of the insignificance and
transience of man in the context of cosmic vastness. Kabīr wonders at the vanity of
men who pride themselves upon trifles. "Even kings mightier than Rāvaṇa, " he
says, "perished in a twinkle" (GG, 1251). Judicious self-respect and a sense of
honour should not however be mistaken for pride. Humility does not rule out the
former. Says Gurū Nānak : "If one loseth one's honour, all that he eats is unclean"
(GG, 142).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Kāhn Siṅgh, Bhāī, Gurmat Sudhākar. Patiala, 1970
Gurmat Prabhākar. Patiala, 1970
Jodh Siṅgh, Bhāī, Gurmati Nirṇaya. Lahore, 1932
Caveeshar, Sardūl Siṅgh, Sikh Dharam Darshan. Patiala, 1969
Sher Singh, Philosophy of Sikhism. Delhi, n. d.
Taran Singh, ed. , Teachings of Guru Nanak Dev. Patiala, 1977
Nripinder Singh, The Sikh Moral Tradition. Delhi, 1990
L. M. Joshi

AHIMSĀ, The term ahimsā is formed by adding the negative prefix a to the word
himsā which is derived from the Sanskrit root haṅ, i. e. 'to kill', 'to harm', or 'to
injure', and means not-killing, not -harming, not-injuring. The commonly used
English equivalent 'non-violence' is inadequate as it seems to give a false impression
that Ahimsā is just a negative virtue. ahimsāis not mere abstention from the use of
force, not just abstention from killing and injuring; it also implies the positive virtues
of compassion and benevolence because not-killing and not-injuring a living being
implicitly amounts to protecting and preserving it and treating it with mercy. The
commandment not to kill and not to offend any living being arises from a feeling of
compassion and from a sense of respect for every sentient being. The injunction that
one is defiled and becomes sinful by killing and harming a living being is a kind of
warning to those who are heedless of the principle of compassion. It thus
strengthens the doctrine of compassion and reinstates the sentiment of respect for
life. The injunction that the practice ofahimsāis meritorious is likewise a kind of
promise of reward to those who are compassionate and sensitive to all forms of
sentient existence. Ahimsā may embrace a variety of motivation---compassion for
living beings, earning religious merit, achieving self-purification and dread for the
sinful consequences of violence and cruelty. For all these motives there is scriptural
authority in India.
In addition to the word ahimsā, we have at least three others yielding the
same sense. In Emperor Ashokā's Rock Edict No. 4 we have avihimsā and
anārambha, while in the old Pālī canonical texts we have the phrase pāṇātipāta
veramaṇi. The word avihimsā is another form of the word ahimsā, non-killing, notinjuring, inoffensiveness, harmlessness, kindness, compassion, benevolence, and
love. The word anarāmbha (or anālambha) means not-slaughtering (living beings in
sacrificial rituals). The pharse pāṇātipāta veramaṇi (Skt. prāṇtipāta viratah) means
abstaining from destroying a living being.
It is now generally admitted that the principle of ahimsā originated outside the
fold of the Vedic tradition. The non-Vedic ascetic sages, known as munis and
śrāmaṇas, were perhaps the first teachers of the doctrines of ahimsā and karuṇā or
compassion. However, its clear mention and its exposition as an important element
in religious life are found only in the later Vedic age which is also the age of the
earliest historical śramaṇas such as Pārśvanātha, Kapilamuni, Kaśyapa Buddha,
Vardhamāna Mahāvīra, and Śākyamuni Buddha. Pārśvanātha (circa 750 BC) is
known to have taught the fourfold moral restraint(caturyāma) which included the
practice of ahimsā.
On the other hand, however, the ancient Brāhmaṇical literature gave only
partial sanction to the practice of ahimsā and continued to respect the custom of
slaughtering animals in sacrificial rituals. It shows that originally it was a principle
peculiar to the Śramaṇic tradition. The slaughter of animals was, of course,
prescribed by the rite, but the practical object of this slaughter was to admit animal
flesh for food.
Sikhism accepts ahimsā as a positive value, and there are numerous hymns in
the Gurū Granth Sāhib, the Sikh Scripture, advising man to cultivate the ethical
values of dayā (compassion) and prem (love). It, however, does not accept ahimsā
as a mere absence of himsā or violence. Love, justice, equality, self-respect and

righteousness are some of the overriding social values to guarantee which even
himsā would be permissible.
Sikhs' social and ethical values are all derived from their metaphysical doctrine.
Sikhism believes in the unicity of God, who in His manifest form pervades the entire
creation. Thus, all the created beings in this phenomenal world are His manifestation
and intrinsically one with Him. This idea of inherent unity of being with the Supreme
Being debars man from using himsā or violence against another being because that
would amount to hurting the Divine. This ontological doctrine of divine unity is in
Sikhism the basis of all positive values of ahimsā such as social equality, love,
compassion, charity and philanthropy. Gurū Arjan, in one of his hymns, adjures man
"not to injure anyone so that thou mayst go to thy true home with honour. " Mercy
or compassion towards living beings is said to be equivalent in merit earned by
pilgrimage to sixty-eight holy spots. This religious value attached to the practice of
mercy affirms the principle of ahimsā. Gurū Tegh Bahādur, Nānak IX, also says that
one of the marks of a wise man is that he does not terrorize others nor does he
allow himself to be terrorized by others.
The Sikh tradition is also replete with instances of sacrifices made for the sake
of justice, righteousness and human freedom. Gurū Arjan and Gurū Tegh Bahādur
laid down their lives to vindicate the right to freedom and religious belief. The
creation of the Khālsā Panth by Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, Nānak X, and the use of sword
as sanctioned by him were also to vindicate the same values. The positive values of
ahimsā like compassion, love, universal brotherhood, freedom and self respect must
prevail. However, if these are violated, man must resist. When all peaceful methods
for such resistance are exhausted, the use of sword, so says Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, is
lawful (Zafarnāmah, verse 22). The use of sword, however, is not for any personal
gain or advancement; it has to be for the general good. Thus was the doctrine of
ahimsā reinterpreted. The Gurūs affirmed their faith in its positive values, but if
himsā became necessary to resist and defeat the forces violating these values, it was
not considered antagonistic to ahimsā.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Davids, T. W. Rhys, "Ahimsā" in Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics. Ed.
James Hastings. Edinburgh, 1964
Jack, Homer A. , ed. , Religion for Peace. Delhi, 1973
Harbans Singh, Peace Imperatives in Sikhism. Patiala, 1991
L. M. Joshi

ĀHLŪVĀLĪĀ MISL, See MISLS

AHMAD SHĀH DURRĀNĪ (1722-1772), the first of the Saddozaī rulers of Afghanistan
and founder of the Durrānī empire, belonged to the Saddozaī section of the Popalzaī
clan of the Abdālī tribe of Afghāns. In the 18th century the Abdālīs were to be found
chiefly around Herāt. Under their leader Zamān Khān, father of Ahmad Khān, they
resisted Persian attempts to take Herāt until, in 1728, they were forced to submit to
Nādir Shāh. Recognizing the fighting qualities of the Abdālīs, Nādir Shāh enlisted
them in his army. Ahmad Khān Abdālī distinguished himself in Nādir's service and
quickly rose from the position of a personal attendant to the command of Nādir's
Abdālī contingent in which capacity he accompanied the Persian conqueror on his
Indian expedition in 1739. In June 1747, Nādir Shāh was assassinated by Qizilbāshī
conspirators at Kuchān in Khurāsān. This prompted Ahmad Khān and the Afghān
soldiery to set out for Qandahār. On the way they elected Ahmad Khān as their
leader, hailing him as Ahmad Shāh. Ahmad Shāh assumed the title of Durr-i-Durrān
(Pearl of Pearls) after which the Abdālī tribe were known as Durrānīs. He was
crowned at Qandahār where coins were struck in his name. With Qandahār as his
base, he easily extended his control over Ghaznī, Kābul and Peshāwar. As for
himself, he, as heir to Nādir Shāh's eastern dominions, laid claim to the provinces
which Nādir had wrested from the Mughal emperor. He invaded India nine times
between 1747 and 1769. He set out from Peshāwar on his first Indian expedition in
December 1747. By January 1748, Lahore and Sirhind had been captured. Eventually
Mughal forces were sent from Delhi to resist his advance. Lacking artillery and vastly
outnumbered, he was defeated at Mānūpur in March 1748 by Mu'īn-ul-Mulk, the son
of the Wazīr Qamar ud-Dīn who had been killed in a preliminary skirmish. Ahmad
Shāh retreated to Afghanistan and Mu'īn ul-Mulk was appointed governor of the
Punjab. Before Mu'īn ul-Mulk could consolidate his position, Ahmad Shāh, in
December 1749, again crossed the Indus. Receiving no reinforcements from Delhi,
Mu'īn ul-Mulk was forced to make terms with him. In accordance with instructions
from Delhi, Ahmad Shāh was promised the revenues of the Chahār Mahāl (Gujrāt,
Auraṅgābād, Siālkoṭ and Pasrūr) which had been granted by the Mughal emperor
Muhammad Shāh to Nādir Shāh in 1739. The non-payment of the revenues of the
Chahār Mahāl was the reason for his third Indian expedition of 1751-52. Lahore was
besieged for four months and the surrounding country devastated. Mu' īn ul-Mulk
was defeated in March 1752, but was reinstated by Ahmad Shāh to whom the
emperor formally ceded the two sūbahs of Lahore and Multān. During this expedition
Kashmīr was annexed to the Durrānī empire. By April 1752 Ahmad Shāh was back in
Afghanistan. Mu'īn ul-Mulk found the Punjab a troublesome charge and his death in
November 1753 only served to intensify the anarchy. All power was for a time in the
hands of his widow, Mughlānī Begam, whose profligacy signalled many a rebellion.
The Mughal Wazīr Imād ul-Mulk took advantage of this anarchy to recover the
Punjab for the empire and entrusted its administration to Ādīnā Beg. Ahmad Shāh
immediately set out to recover his lost province. He reached Lahore towards the end
of December 1756, and, after an unopposed march, entered Delhi on 28 January
1757. The city was plundered and the defenseless inhabitants massacred. A similar
fate befell the inhabitants of Mathurā, Vrindāvan and Āgrā. Towards the end of
March 1757, an outbreak of cholera amongst his troops forced Ahmad Shāh to leave
India. The territory of Sirhind was annexed to the Afghān empire. Najīb ud-Daulā,
the Ruhīlā leader who had supported him, was left in charge of Delhi and his own
son, Taimūr, appointed viceroy of the Punjab. He had no sooner left India than the
Sikhs, together with Ādīnā Beg, rose in revolt against Taimūr. Early in 1758 Ādīnā
Beg invited Marāṭhās to expel the Afghāns from the Punjab. This was accomplished
by the Marāṭhās who actually crossed the Indus and held Peshāwar for a few

months. These events brought Ahmad Shāh to India once again (1759-61). The
Marāṭhās rapidly evacuated the Punjab before the Afghān advance and retreated
towards Delhi. They were routed with enormous losses at Pānīpat on 14 January
1761.
After Pānīpat the main factor to reckon with was the growing power of the
Sikhs who had constantly been assailing Ahmad Shāh's lines of communication. It
was against them that the Afghān invader's sixth expedition (1762) was specifically
directed. News had reached him in Afghanistan of the defeat, after his withdrawal
from the country, of his general, Nūr ud-Dīn Bāmezaī, at the hands of the Sikhs who
were fast spreading themselves out over the Punjab and had declared their leader,
Jassā Siṅgh Āhlūvālīā, king of Lahore (1761). To rid his Indian dominions of them
once for all, he set out from Qandahār. Marching with alacrity, he overtook the Sikhs
as they were withdrawing into the Mālvā after crossing the Sutlej. The moving
caravan comprised a substantial portion of the total Sikh population and contained,
besides active fighters, a large body of old men, women and children who were
being escorted to the safety of the interior of the country. Surprised by Ahmad Shāh,
the Sikhs threw a cordon round those who needed protection, and prepared for the
battle. Continuing their march in this form, they fought the invaders and their Indian
allies desperately. Ahmad Shāh succeeded, in the end, in breaking through the ring
and glutted his spite by carrying out a full scale butchery. Near the village of Kup,
near Mālerkoṭlā, nearly 25, 000 Sikhs were killed in a single day's battle (5 February
1762), known in Sikh history as Vaḍḍā Ghallūghārā, the Great Killing. But the Sikhs
were by no means crushed. Within four months of the Great Carnage, the Sikhs had
inflicted a severe defeat on the Afghān governor of Sirhind. Four months later they
were celebrating Dīvālī in the Harimandar (Amritsar) which the Shāh had blown up
by gunpowder in April 1762, and were fighting with him again a pitched battle
forcing him to withdraw from Amritsar under cover of darkness (17 October). Ahmad
Shāh left Lahore for Afghanistan on 12 December 1762.
Ahmad Shāh planned another crusade against the Sikhs and he invited this
time his Balūch ally, Amīr Nasīr Khān, to join him in the adventure. He started from
Afghanistan in October 1764 and reaching Lahore attacked Amritsar on 1 December
1764. A small batch of thirty Sikhs, in the words of Qāzī Nūr Muhammad, the author
of the Jaṅgnāmah, who happened to be in the imperial train accompanying the
Balūch division, "grappled with the ghāzīs, split blood and sacrificed their own lives
for their Gurū. " Ahmad Shāh came down to Sirhind without encountering anywhere
the main body of the Khālsā. This time he went no farther than Sirhind. As he was
marching homewards through the Jalandhar Doāb, Sikh sardārs, including Jassā
Siṅgh Āhluvālīā, Jassā Siṅgh Rāmgaṛhīā, Chaṛhat Siṅgh Sukkarchakkīā, Jhaṇḍā Siṅgh
Bhaṅgī and Jai Siṅgh Kanhaiyā kept a close trail constantly raiding the imperial
caravan. Their depredations caused great annoyance to the Shāh who lost much of
his baggage to the Sikhs. The floods in the River Chenāb took a further toll of his
men and property, and he returned to Afghanistan mauled and considerably shaken.
The fear of his Indian empire falling to the Sikhs continued to obsess the
Shāh's mind and he led out yet another punitive campaign against them towards the
close of 1766. This was his eighth invasion into India. The Sikhs had recourse to
their old game of hide-and-seek. Vacating Lahore which they had wrested from
Afghān nominees, Kābulī Mall and his nephew Amīr Siṅgh, they faced squarely the
Afghān general, Jahān Khān at Amritsar, forcing him to retreat, with 6, 000 of the

Durrānī soldiers killed. Ahmad Shāh offered the governorship of Lahore to Sikh
sardār, Lahiṇā Siṅgh Bhaṅgī, but the latter declined the proposal. Jassā Siṅgh
Āhlūvālīā, with an army of 30, 000 Sikhs, roamed about the neighbourhood of the
Afghān camp plundering it to his heart's content. Never before had Ahmad Shāh felt
so helpless. The outcome of the unequal, but bitter, contest now lay clearly in favour
of the Sikhs. The Shāh had realized that his Indian dominions were now at the
mercy of the Sikhs and he bowed to the inevitable. His own soldiers were getting
restive and the summer heat of the Punjab was becoming unbearable. He, at last,
decided to return home, but took a different route this time to avoid molestation by
the Sikhs. As soon as Ahmad Shāh retired, Sikhs reoccupied their territories.
The Shāh led out his last expedition in the beginning of 1769. He crossed the
Indus and the Jehlum and reached as far as the right bank of the Chenāb and fixed
his camp at Jukālīāṅ to the northwest of Gujrāt. By this time the Sikhs had
established themselves more firmly in the country. Moreover, dissensions broke out
among the Shāh's followers and he was compelled to return to Afghanistan.
On Ahmad Shāh's death in 1772 of the cancerous wound said to have been
caused on his nose by a flying piece of brick when the Harimandar Sāhib was
destroyed with gunpowder, his empire roughly extended from the Oxus to the Indus
and from Tibet to Khurāsān. It embraced Kashmīr, Peshāwar, Multān, Sindh,
Balūchistān, Khurāsān, Herāt, Qandahār, Kābul and Balkh.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Ganda Singh, Ahmad Shah Durrani. Bombay, 1959
Gupta, Hari Rām, History of the Sikhs, vol. II. Delhi, 1978
Sarkar, Jadunath, Fall of the Mughal Empire, vol. II. Delhi, 1971
Khushwant Siṅgh, A History of the Sikhs, vol. I. Princeton, 1963
B. J. Hasrat

AHMAD, SHAIKH (1564-1624), celebrated Muslim thinker and theologian of the
Naqshbandī Sūfī order, was born on 26 May 1564 at Sirhind in present-day Paṭiālā
district of the Punjab. He received his early education at the hands of his father,
Shaikh 'Abd al-Ahad, and later studied at Siālkoṭ, now in Pakistan. About the year AD
1599, he met Khwājā Muhammad al-Bākī bi-Allah, who initiated him into the
Naqshbandī order. Shaikh Ahmad soon became a leading figure in that school and
wrote numerous letters and treatises on many fine points of the Sūfī doctrine such
as the concepts of prophecy (nubuwwah) and sainthood (walāyah) and the
relationship between sharī'ah, i. e. religious law, and tarīqah, the mystic path. He
disapproved of Emperor Akbar's liberal approach to religion and wanted the rulers to
reimpose jizyah, a special toll tax on Hindus, not only to suppress them but also to
humiliate them. Basic to his philosophy was the idea that the State should be
controlled by sharī'ah, the Islamic law, which was not to be modified to suit
changing circumstances. He was also against the pantheistic and liberal views of
other Sūfī sects. He thus antagonized not only the Hindus but also an influential
section of the Muslims. Emperor Jahāṅgīr, in order to placate the public sentiment,
imprisoned him in 1619 in the Gwālīor Fort. He was, however, released after a year.
The next four years Shaikh Ahmad spent at the imperial court. He died on 30
November 1624 at Sirhind where his tomb still stands and attracts pilgrims from all
over India and abroad.
Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindī, the most prominent figure of the Naqshbandī order in
India, has been given the honorific title of Mujaddid-i-Alf-i-Sānī, the renewer of the
second millennium (of Islamic era). The collection of his letters entitled Maktūbāt-iImām-i-Rabbānī (lit. epistles of the divine prelate) has been hailed as a landmark in
the development of Muslim religious thought in India. His works and interpretations
had a deep influence on Emperor Auraṅgzīb and his State policy. One who derived
the most satisfaction from the execution of Gurū Arjan under Emperor Jahāṅgīr's
orders in 1606 was Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindī. In his letter as quoted at No. 193, in his
Maktūbāt, he gave expression to his sense of jubilation over "the execution of the
accursed kāfir of Goindvāl. "
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Abbott, Freeland, Islam and Pakistan. New York, 1968
Friedmann, Yohanan, Shaykh Ahmad Sirhindi. London, 1971
Gupta, Hari Ram, History of the Sikhs, vol. I. Delhi, 1973
Harbans Singh, The Heritage of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1983
Yohanan Friedmann

AHMAD YĀR KHĀN ṬIWĀṆĀ (d. 1829), second son of Khān Muhammad Khān, the
Ṭiwāṇā chief of Miṭṭhā Ṭiwāṇā, in Shāhpur district, measured swords with Sikhs
more than once during Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh's time. Ahmad Yār Khān revolted
against his father and, having succeeded in attracting most of the tribe to his side,
compelled him to surrender the chiefship to him. In 1817, Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh
dispatched troops under the command of Misr Dīvān Chand against the Ṭiwāṇā chief
at Nūrpur Ṭiwāṇā. The fort was conquered and Ahmad Yār Khān ran away to
Jhaṇḍāvālā, situated in the Mankerā territory. On the withdrawal of the Sikh army,
with some troops having been left behind under Jasvant Siṅgh Mokal in Nūrpur for
guarding the fort, Ahmad Yār Khān came back and recovered control of the country,
but he had to withdraw for the second time and again run back to Jaṇḍiālā. The
Nawāb of Mankerā gave him no quarter, turned him out from there and imprisoned
his sons. He then yielded to the authority of the Mahārājā who granted him a jāgīr
worth Rs 10, 000, subject to the service of sixty horse. In 1821, Mahārājā Raṇjīt
Siṅgh left on a campaign against Hāfiz Ahmad Khān, the Nawāb of Mankerā, when
Ahmad Yār Khān readily took the opportunity to join him in the enterprise just to
settle some old scores with the Nawāb. The assistance rendered by Ahmad Yār Khān
and his tribe, the Ṭiwāṇās, during this campaign was of crucial importance. The
Mahārājā was especially struck with the handsome and manly bearing of his men
and their bold riding, and insisted upon a troop of Ṭiwāṇā horse returning with him
to Lahore. Ahmad Yār Khān died in 1829.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Sūrī, Sohan Lāl, Umdāt-ut-Twārīkh. Lahore, 1885-89
G. S. Nayyar

AHMADĪYAH MOVEMENT, started in the late nineteenth century as a reforming and
rejuvenating current in Islam, originated in Qādīāṅ in Gurdāspur district of the
Punjab. In the 1880's, Mirzā Ghulām Ahmad, son of the chief land-owning family of
Qādīāṅ, after he had received revelations and preached a renewal of Islamic faith,
began to draw followers. Although he had been educated traditionally by tutors in
Qur'ān and hadīth, Ahmad had been sent to Siālkoṭ by his father to serve his
apprenticeship as a law clerk and to train for the legal profession. Unsuccessful in his
work and while becoming increasingly religious, Ahmad came in contact with
Christian missionaries and became convinced that they posed a threat to Islam.
Following the advent of the Ārya Samāj in the Punjab in 1877, Ghulām Ahmad also
realized the threat posed by renascent militant Hinduism.
Spurred by a commitment to Islam reinforced by revelatory experiences, and
aware of the growing threat posed by Christianity and Hinduism, Mirzā Ghulām
Ahmad, in 1880, at the age of 40, began to publish a four-volume work, Bārāhīn-iAhmadīyah, in which he attempted to refute the claims of several Hindu reform
movements that they were superior to Islam. In 1889, he permitted his followers to
make bay'at or confirm their allegiance to him. This bay'at was not the kind made by
Sūfīs in joining a tarīqah or order but rather more of the traditional Islamic
commitment made to a khalīfah.
In 1891, Ghulām Ahmad claimed to be the masīh maw'ūd (Promised Messiah)
and mahdī of the Muslims. While the former claim was sufficient to bring the wrath
of Muslim 'ulamā or religious scholars down on him, the latter claim was explicitly
offensive to most Muslims. The mahdī usually understood by Muslims to be Jesus
Christ, is the figure who will come at the end of time to establish the kingdom of
God on earth. Ahmad's claim to be the mahdī stemmed from his theory that he was
the successor to Jesus. This involved an elaborate explanation proving that Jesus
was not in heaven, as taught by Islam, but that on being taken off the cross, Jesus
had been treated with a miraculous ointment and cured of his wounds. He had then
escaped, wandering eastward, coming finally to Kashmīr. There he ministered to the
lost tribes of Israel, until his death at the age of 120. Ghulām Ahmad demonstrated
in his book, Masīh Hindustān Meṅ, that he had located Jesus' grave on Khān Yār
Street in Srīnagar.
By proving that Jesus had died a natural death, Ghulām Ahmad believed he
had proved his claims to be mahdī and promised Messiah of the Muslims. Through
his writings in Urdu and Arabic as well as through his preaching in the Punjabi
language, Ahmad won some thousands of followers during his lifetime. In 1891, the
first Ahmadīyah jalsah or annual community gathering was held at Qādīāṅ. This
meeting has been held annually during the last week of December ever since,
though since partition it is also held in the new international headquarters at
Rabwāh near Chinioṭ, West Punjab, Pakistan.
While Ahmad's forthright stand against Hindus and Christians at first won him
the admiration of certain Islamic sects, his claims to a kind of prophethood and his
call for jīhād by missionary effort rather than by militant activity brought on him the
wrath of both Shīāh and Sunnī religious leaders. His right to prophecy was also
challenged in court. He had also prophesied that the wrath of God would fall upon
his enemies. When Paṇḍit Lekh Rām, the militant Ārya Samājist, was murdered by a
Lahore Muslim in 1897, two years before the awful death predicted for him by

Ghulām Ahmad, communal controversy in Lahore reached an unprecedented level
for those times.
Mirzā Ghulām Ahmad's first interaction with the Sikh community occurred in
1895 at the height of his controversy with the Ārya Samāj. After studying Swāmī
Dayānand's Satyārth Prakāsh (The Light of Truth), in which the Swāmī had attacked
every other religion including the Sikh, Ahmad, though he had not heard of any Sikh
responses to these attacks, decided to take up "the cudgels against Dayanand to
protect the honour of Nanak, " according to Ahmad's biographer, Abdur Rahmān
Dard. It was thus that Ahmad began a work in Urdu on the life of Gurū Nānak, which
not only sought to answer Dayānand's charges against Sikhism but also attempted
to separate legend from known facts about Gurū Nānak. Ahmad's ultimate aim in
this study was to win over the Sikhs to Islam and to convince the Sikhs that he was
the promised Messiah by proving that Gurū Nānak had been a Muslim.
Sikh scholars answered the claims of Mirzā Ghulām Ahmad and refuted his
arguments about Gurū Nānak. Bhārat Sudhār, an Ārya Samāj journal published at
Lahore, sought a rapprochement with the Sikhs by attacking Ahmad.
Since the partition of the Punjab, the principal seat of the Ahmadīyah
movement has moved to Rabwāh, Pakistan, with only a token staff remaining to
care for the original shrines and buildings of Qādīāṅ, now situated a few miles on the
Indian side of the border. In Pakistan the Ahmadīyahs have since been declared a
heretic, non-Muslim sect.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Lavan, Spencer, Ahmadiyah Movement. Amritsar, 1976
Abbott, Freeland, Islam and Pakistan. New York, 1968
Spencer Lavan

ĀHRAURĀ, a small town in Mirzāpur district of Uttar Pradesh, 40 km south of
Vārāṇasī (25º-20'N, 82º-58'E), has a Sikh shrine called Gurdwārā Bāgh Shrī Gurū
Tegh Bahādur Jī Kā. Gurū Tegh Bahādur visited Āhraurā in 1666 in the course of his
journey in the eastern parts. It is said that he told a devotee, Bhāī Sādhojī, to plant
a tree. This was the beginning of a garden which still exists. From this garden
(bāgh), the Gurdwārā derives its name. A closet called Nivās Sthān marks the room
in which Gurū Tegh Bahādur is said to have stayed. The shrine is registered as Shrī
Gurū Siṅgh Sabhā and is managed by a local committee. There is a handwritten
copy of the Gurū Granth Sāhib, transcribed in 1799 Bk/AD 1742, kept in the private
house of the granthī. A small slip, supposed to contain Gurū Tegh Bahādur's
autograph, is pasted on it. Another handwritten pothī with a similar autograph, is in
the possession of another individual, Hīrā Siṅgh. He has even built a gurdwārā
named Gurdwārā Gurū Gobind Siṅgh Jī Daskhatī Sāhib in honour of the pothī, but
keeps the volume in his house and displays it in the Gurdwārā only on special
occasions.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Faujā Siṅgh, Gurū Teg Bahādur, Yatrā Asthān, Prampravāṅ te Yād Chinn. Patiala,
1976
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AHWĀL-I-DĪNĀ BEG KHĀN, Persian manuscript of unknown authorship, gives
biographical details about Ādīnā Beg Khān, faujdār of Jalandhar. The manuscript
forms part of the collection of Persian Manuscripts, Sir H. Elliot's Papers, Additional
MS. 30780 (ff. 215-292), Extracts relating to India, vol. VIII. 1, preserved in British
Library, London. Copies of the manuscript are also held by Panjab University Library,
Lahore, Sikh Historical Research Department, Khālsā College, Amritsar, and Dr
Gaṇḍā Siṅgh Collection at Punjabi University, Paṭiālā (25 pages in neat and clear
handwriting). The last-named collection also holds an English translation of the
manuscript.
According to the author, Dīnā (Ādīnā) Beg Khān was born in a poor Arāīṅ,
vegetable-growing, family in Sharakpur Paṭṭī village, near Lahore. He started his
career as a sepoy exercising jurisdiction over a few villages in Lohīāṅ area near
Sultānpur Lodhī for revenue collection. He, through his own prudence and
astuteness and by the help of his patron, Lālā Srī Nivās Dhīr, a wealthy merchant of
Sultānpur, rose, not without undergoing several ups and downs, to be the virtual
ruler of the Jalandhar region. Shrewd in diplomacy and statecraft, he developed as it
suited his interests friendly relations with Mughal governors, Afghān invaders, Sikh
chiefs and the Marāṭhās He married only towards the close of his career, but
divorced his bride as soon as he learnt that she came of a high Sayyid caste. Thus
he died childless and his territories and treasure were upon his death usurped by
local chieftains.
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AHWĀL-I-FIRQAH-I-SIKKHĀṄ, variously titled as Twārīkh-i-Sikkhāṅ, Kitāb-i-Tarīkh-iSikkhāṅ and Guzārisṅ-i-Ahwāl-i-Sikhāṅ, by Munshī Khushwaqt Rāi, is a history in
Persian of the Sikhs from their origin to AD 1811. Khushwaqt Rāi was an official
news writer of the East India Company accredited to the Sikh city of Amritsar. It was
written at the request of Col (afterwards General Sir) David Ochterlony, British
political agent at Ludhiāṇā on the Anglo-Sikh frontier. Opinion also exists that it was
written at the suggestion of Charles Theophilus Metcalfe. Henry Prinsep and Capt
Murray based their accounts of the Sikhs on this manuscript. The British Library
preserves a manuscript (No. Or. 187) under the title kitāb -i-Tarīkh-i-Sikkhāṅ ( in the
Preface it is designated Guzārish-i-Ahwāl-i-Sikkhāṅ). The name of the author is not
mentioned. Copies of the manuscript are also preserved at Punjab State Archives,
Paṭiālā, and at Khālsā College, Amritsar. The manuscript (No. M/ 800) entitled
Twārīkh-i-Ahwāl-i-Sikkhāṅ at the Punjab State Archives has 194 folios. The account
begins with the birth of Gurū Nānak in 1469, followed by lives of the succeeding
Gurūs, of the career and exploits of Bandā Siṅgh, the chiefs of the Āhlūvālīā,
Phūlkīāṅ and Kanhāiya misl, the hill chiefs of Kāṅgṛā or the Kaṭoch dynasty, and of
the Sukkarchakīā misl. Events of the reign of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh up to 1811 such
as Holkar's arrival in the Punjab in 1805 and the conquests of Paṭhānkoṭ and Ḍaskā
are described in some precise detail. The account closes with the arrival in 1811 of
the Afghān embassy for a meeting with Raṇjīt Siṅgh. Khushwaqt Rāi's work
furnishes considerable information on the early history of the Sikhs though it is not
exempt from inaccuracies or personal prejudices. The account of Sikhs' rise to power
is however factual and straight forward.
The manuscript remains unpublished. An Urdu translation, the only one known
to exist, was discovered by Dr Gaṇḍā Siṅgh in the armoury from under the debris
after an accidental gunpowder explosion in Qilā Mubārak at Paṭiālā on 1 May 1950.
The first 16 pages of the manuscript were missing. A Punjabi translation of the
manuscript made by Milkhī Rām Kishan is preserved at the Department of Punjab
Historical Studies, Punjabi University, Paṭiālā. The manuscript awaits publication.
Gurbax Siṅgh

ĀĪ PANTH, one of the twelve sects of yogīs, whose adherents worship Āī Bhavānī, a
tribal female deity, believed to be an extension of Śakti. Śiva in the form of
ardhanārīśvara is said to have two forms represented by his own halves. His right
side is the male whose followers are called dakṣināchārīs, whereas his left portion
represents the female known as Śakti, the basic power also called Ambā, Durgā, Kālī
or Bhavānī. Worshippers of the female aspect of Śiva are called vāmamārgīs, known
for their peculiar beliefs and customs. They accept no taboos in the matter of food
and accord religious sanction to sexual freedom. They practise austerities; for a
living they would go begging from house to house. Their living style (jugat) consists
in smearing their bodies with ashes (bibhūt), wearing heavy rings (mundā or
mundrā) in their split ears and covering their bodies with a loose shroud (khinthā).
When they go out begging, they carry a begging bowl in one hand and a club
(ḍaṇḍā) or fire-tongs in the other.
In course of time, many sects based on this śakti principle appeared
throughout the length and breadth of the Indian subcontinent. Āī Panth is one of
them and the Mahar tribals once found almost exclusively along the River Sutlej,
opposite Fāzilkā, especially in the Montgomery, Multān and Bahāwalpur area,
worshipped this female spirit and kept her image in their homes. Gurū Nānak during
his preaching journeys came across several varieties of yogīs at places like Gorakh
Haṭaṛī, Achal Vaṭālā, Sumer Mountain and Gorakhmatā, now known as Nānak Matā.
There are extensive references in the Gurū Granth Sāhib which testify to these
meetings. In the Japu (stanza 28) Gurū Nānak exhorts an anonymous yogī belonging
to the Āī Panth to cultivate control over the mind which was more important than all
bodily exercises and discipline. Says Gurū Nānak: "Make contentment thy earrings,
modesty thy begging bowl and wallet and the Lord's meditation thy ashes. Let the
thought of death be thy patched coat, chastity like that of a virgin's body thy life's
deportment, and faith in God thy staff. The realization of brotherhood with all is the
real creed of the Āī Panth. "O Yogī, deem the conquering of the self as the conquest
of the world" (GG, 6).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Bhattacharyya. N. N. , Indian Mother Goddess. Calcutta, 1971
History of the Tantric Religion. Delhi, 1982
Chakravarti, Chintaharan, Tantras : Studies on Their Religion and Literature.
Calcutta, 1972
Rose, H. A. , A Glossary of the Tribes and Castes of the Punjab and NorthWest Frontier Province [Reprint]. Patiala, 1970
Jodh Siṅgh

AJAB, BHĀĪ, a Jaṭṭ of Saṅghā clan who lived in the village of Ḍaraulī, now called
Ḍaraulī Bhāī, in Farīdkoṭ district of the Punjab. He, like his brothers Umar Shāh and
Ajāib, forsook his faith in Sultān Sakhī Sarwar, became a Sikh and rendered devoted
service at the time of the construction of the Harimandar at Amritsar. The three
brothers were appointed masands, or parish leaders, in the areas of Mogā, Zīrā and
Dharamkoṭ. They often used to quote Gurū Arjan's line: "If God so wills, He may
keep one alive even after breath had departed the body. " They were especially
gratified once to have the line expounded by the Gurū himself.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Macauliffe, M. A. , The Sikh Religion. Oxford, 1909
Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Twārīkh Gurū Khālsā [Reprint]. Patiala, 1970
Tāran Siṅgh

AJAB SIṄGH (d. 1705), son of Bhāī Manī Rām, a Rājput Sikh of 'Alīpur in Multān
district, now in Pakistan, came to Anandpur with his father and four brothers, and
received the rites of initiation at the inauguration of the Khālsā by Gurū Gobind
Siṅgh on the Baisākhī day of 1699. He remained in Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's retinue until
his death in the battle of Chamkaur on 7 December 1705.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Padam, Piārā Siṅgh, and Giānī Garjā Siṅgh, eds. , Gurū kīāṅ Sākhīāṅ. Patiala,
1986
Harbans Singh, Guru Tegh Bahadur. Delhi, 1982
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AJĀIB, BHĀĪ, a Saṅghā Jaṭṭ who embraced the Sikh faith in the time of Gurū Arjan.
He belonged to the village of Ḍaraulī Bhāī, in present-day Farīdkoṭ district. Two of
his brothers, Umar Shāh and Ajab, were the Gurū's masands or vicars. Bhāī Ajāib
took part in sevā, voluntary labour of hands, at the time of digging of the Amritsar
pool and construction of the Harimandar.

See AJAB, BHĀĪ
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Macauliffe, Max Arthur, The Sikh Religion. Oxford, 1909
Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Twārīkh Gurū Khālsā [Reprint]. Patiala, 1970
Tāran Siṅgh

AJĀIB SIṄGH (d. 1705), one of the martyrs of Chamkaur, was the son of Bhāī Manī
Rām, a Rājpūt Sikh of the time of Gurū Tegh Bahādur and Gurū Gobind Siṅgh. Manī
Rām had presented five of his sons including Ajāib Siṅgh to Gurū Gobind Siṅgh at
Anandpur where they took amrit or baptism of the double-edged sword on the
historic day of the birth of the Khālsā on 30 March 1699. Ajāib Siṅgh thereafter
remained in attendance upon the Gurū. He fell fighting at Chamkaur on 7 December
1705.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Padam, Piārā Siṅgh, and Giānī Garjā Siṅgh, eds. , Gurū kīān Sākhīāṅ. Patiala,
1986
Kuir Siṅgh, Gurbilās Pātshāhī 10. Patiala, 1968
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AJĀT SĀGAR, by Surjan Dās Ajāt, is the religious book of the Ajātpanthī sect of the
Udāsīs. Written in AD 1851, the only known manuscript of the work was available in
the Sikh Reference Library, Amritsar, until it perished during the Blue Star action in
the holy premises in 1984. The author Surjan Dās (father: Bāgh Siṅgh, mother:
Gulāb Devī), a disciple of Sant Ṭahil Dās who was in the Bhagat Bhagvānīe sect of
the Udāsīs, established his gaddīat Ajnevāl, in Gujrāṅwālā district, now in Pakistan.
Surjan Dās preached the ideal of a casteless (a = without; jāt = caste) society and
thus came to be called Ajāt and his followers Ajātpanthī. Another of his works was
Surjan Bodh which is held in the Pañjāb University Library, Chaṇḍīgaṛh, under MS.
No. 111. The poetry of Surjan Dās is uneven, though he tries to keep close to the
gurbāṇī idiom. Transience of the world, man's forgetfulness of God and the
importance of nām are the principal themes of Ajāt Sāgar. Gurū Nānak has been
depicted in this work as "the destroyer of evil. "
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Randhīr Siṅgh, Bhāī, Udāsī Sikhāṅ di Vithiā. Chandigarh, 1972
Dharam Siṅgh

AJĪT SIṄGH (1881-1947), patriot and revolutionary, was born in February 1881 at
Khaṭkaṛ Kalāṅ, in Jalandhar district of the Punjab, the son of Arjan Siṅgh and Jai
Kaur. He had his early education in his village and then at Sāīṅ Dāss Anglo Sanskrit
High School, Jalandhar, and D. A. V. College, Lahore. He later joined the Bareilly
College to study law, but left without completing the course owing to ill health. He
became a munshī or teacher of Oriental languages, establishing himself at Lahore.
In 1903, he was married to Harnām Kaur, daughter of Dhanpat Rāi, a pleader of
Kasūr.
Ajīt Siṅgh came into the political arena in the agrarian agitation in the Punjab
in 1906-07. The passing of the Punjab Land Colonization Bill (1906) and
enhancement in the rates of land revenue and irrigation tax had created widespread
discontent in the rural areas. The Colonization Bill aimed at stopping further
fragmentation of land holdings in the Chenāb Colony - mostly inhabited by Sikh exsoldiers by introducing the law of primogeniture. This, and some other clauses of the
Bill, caused great resentment among the cultivators, who regarded it as unjustified
interference with their traditional rights insofar as they related to the division of
property. Popular feelings were further aroused by the prosecution, in 1907, of the
editor of the Punjabee, an English-language bi-weekly of anti-government views.
In this climate of social unrest and of anti-British sentiment, Ajīt Siṅgh
supported the setting up in 1907 of a revolutionary organization, Bhārat Mātā
Society, with headquarters at Lahore. A large number of protest meetings and
demonstrations against the Colonization Bill were held not only in villages but also in
important cities such as Rāwalpiṇḍī, Gujrāṅwālā, Multān, Lahore and Amritsar. Many
of these were addressed by Ajit Siṅgh who had become a violent critic of the
government. Besides referring to the immediate problems the peasantry faced, he
exhorted the people to strive for the freedom of the country and end foreign rule.
On the recommendation of the Punjab Government, the Government of India
deported Ajīt Siṅgh to Mandalay on 2 June 1907.
Upon his release in November 1907, Ajīt Siṅgh returned to the Punjab amid
much popular acclaim. He did not wait long to resume his anti-British activities. He
Launched a newspaper, the Peshwā, with Sūfī Ambā Prasād as its editor. He also
brought out a series of tracts and pamphlets, such as Bāghī Masīhā, Muhibbān-iWatan, Bandar Bāṇṭ and Uṅgalī Pakaṛte Paňjā Pakaṛā, attacking British rule in India.
Fearing prosecution for an article in the Peshwā, Ajīt Siṅgh; along with Ziā ul-Haq,
escaped to Persia in 1909. There he continued to work for India's freedom and
succeeded in building up a small revolutionary centre at Shīrāz. In May 1910, he and
his associates started, in Persian, a revolutionary journal, the Hayāt. In September
1910, he shifted to Bushire, with a view to establishing contact with his comrades in
India through Indian traders and seamen. His activities alarmed the British
government. Considering further residence in Iran unsafe, Ajīt Siṅgh proceeded to
Turkey via Russia where he met Mustafā Kamāl Pāshā, Turkish general and
statesman. From Turkey he went to Paris and met Indian revolutionaries. Later he
shifted to Switzerland where he made the acquaintance of Lālā Har Dayāl and
revolutionaries from other parts of the world - South America, Germany, Italy,
Poland, Russia, Egypt and Morocco. Here he also met the Italian leader and future
dictator, Mussolini and the famous Russian revolutionist, Trotsky. Towards the end
of 1913, he shifted to France which he left soon after the outbreak of World War I,
to go to Brazil where he remained from 1914 to 1932. From Brazil it was easier for

him to be in touch with the leaders of the Ghadr Party in the United States. He also
formed a society of Indians settled in Brazil to make them aware of their duty
towards their mother country and also to raise funds to support India's struggle for
freedom. From 1932 to 1938, Ajīt Siṅgh worked in France, Switzerland and
Germany. He renewed his contacts with the Indian revolutionaries working in
Europe. He also met Subhās Chandra Bose. He wanted to return to India where, he
thought, he could work more effectively for the cause dear to his heart. But the
government, viewing him as a "dangerous agitator" and an "undesirable foreigner"
(he having secured Brazilian citizenship), did not allow his entry into the country.
On the eve of World War II, Ajīt Siṅgh shifted to Italy where, in order to
intensify his activities and mobilize Italian public and government support in favour
of India, he formed Friends of India Society. During his stay in Italy he formed a
revolutionary army of the Indian prisoners of war. His passionate speeches in
Hindustānī from Rome Radio and his own example of sacrifice and suffering for the
country made a deep impact on the Indian soldiers. After the fall of Italy, Ajīt Siṅgh
was imprisoned and kept in an Italian jail and later, when Germans surrendered, he
was shifted to a jail in Germany. Hard life in military camps told upon his health.
After the formation of the Interim government in the country under Jawāharlāl
Nehrū, Ajīt Siṅgh returned to India via London. On 8 March 1847, he reached
Karāchī and then came to Delhi where the great wanderer was given a warm
welcome by his countrymen. In Delhi, he was the guest of Jawāharlāl Nehrū, and he
participated in the Asian Relations Conference which was then in session in Delhi.
Ajīt Siṅgh died at Dalhousie on 15 August 1947-the day India became an
independent nation.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Ganda Singh, ed. , History of the Freedom Movement in the Panjab, vol. IV
(Deportation of Lala Lajpat Rai and Sardar Ajit Singh). Patiala, 1978
Pardaman Singh and Joginder Singh Dhanki, ed. , Buried Alive. Chandigarh,
1984
Mohan, Kamlesh, Militant Nationalism in the Punjab 1919-1935. Delhi, 1985
Puri, Harish K. , Ghadar Movement. Amritsar, 1983
Deol, Gurdev Siṅgh, Shahīd Ajīt Siṅgh. Patiala, 1973
Jagjīt Siṅgh, Ghadar Pārtī Lahir. Delhi, 1979
Parduman Siṅgh

AJĪT SIṄGH PĀLIT (d. 1725), adopted son of Mātā Sundarī, the mother of Sāhibzādā
Ajīt Siṅgh. Little is known about the family he came of except that Mātā Sundarī took
him over from a goldsmith of Delhi and adopted him because of his striking
resemblance with her son, Ajīt Siṅgh, who had met a martyr's death at Chamkaur.
She treated him with great affection and got him married to a girl from Burhānpur.
Emperor Bahādur Shāh, considering Ajīt Siṅgh to be Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's heir,
ordered, on 30 October 1708, the bestowal of a khill'at upon him as a mark of
condolence for the Gurū's death. When Bahādur Shāh came to the Punjab in 1710
personally to handle the situation created by the exploits of Bandā Siṅgh he ordered
Rājā Chhatrasāl Bundelā to bring Ajīt Siṅgh to his court. Ajīt Siṅgh appeared in the
imperial court on 26 September 1710 and was given a robe of honour, but on 27
December 1710 the emperor placed him under the surveillance of one Kār-talab
Khān. On 1 June 1711, he was transferred to the camp of Sarbarāh Khān. On 30
December 1711, Bahādur Shāh assigned to him the jāgīr of Gurū Chakk (Amritsar).
His purpose in honouring Ajīt Siṅgh as Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's successor was to use
him as a counterweight against Bandā Siṅgh Bahādur, who was then leading a
general uprising of the Sikhs. Suspecting his Hindu officers to be in sympathy with
the Sikhs, Bahādur Shāh had issued a proclamation, early in September 1710, to "all
Hindus employed in imperial offices to shave off their beards. " On 10 December
1710 was issued a special order to all faujdārs around Shāhjahānābād "to kill the
worshippers of Nānak wherever found. " Ajīt Siṅgh, however, revelled in royal
patronage. Back in Delhi after Bahādur Shāh's death in 1712, he continued to live in
style as a courtier and grew arrogant and haughty even towards Mātā Sundarī. Once
as she reproached him for his pretensions and for his desire to wear Gurū Gobind
Siṅgh's weapons, he threatened to attack her. Mātā Sundarī disowned him, and he
started living in a separate house. On receiving a complaint one day that Ajīt Siṅgh
and his followers had mocked an assembly of Muslims at prayer, the emperor
ordered him to present himself at court with hair shaven or face severe punishment.
Ajīt Siṅgh cut off his hair and abjectly begged the emperor's pardon. This deprived
him of whatever respect he commanded among the Sikhs of Delhi. Mātā Sundarī left
Delhi and went to live at Mathurā with Ajīt Siṅgh's wife, Tārā Bāī, and his son, Haṭhī
Siṅgh. Ajīt Siṅgh kept up the pretence of being a gurū. Once, in his haughtiness, he
caused a Muslim mendicant to be beaten to death by his followers. Under the orders
of Emperor Muhammad Shāh, he was sentenced to death by torture. Dragged
behind an elephant in the streets of Delhi, he met with a painful end. This was on 18
January 1725. His dead body was cremated in Sabzi Maṇḍī area, where a shrine was
raised in his memory. His son, Haṭhī Siṅgh, as he grew up, also belied the
expectations of Mātā Sundarī, who came back to Delhi. Haṭhī Siṅgh, a pretender to
gurūship like his father, went to live at Burhānpur after the sack of Mathurā by
Ahmad Shāh Durrānī in 1757. He died there, issueless, in 1783.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Padam, Piārā Siṅgh and Giānī Garjā Siṅgh, eds. , Gurū kīān Sākhīāṅ. Patiala,
1986
Chhibbar, Kesar Siṅgh, Baṅsāvalīnāmā Dāsāṅ Pātshāhīāṅ Kā. Chandigarh,
1972
Saināpati, Kavī, Srī Gur Sobhā. Patiala, 1980
Shamsher Siṅgh Ashok

AJĪT SIṄGH, RĀJĀ, ruler of Lāḍvā, was born the son of Gurdit Siṅgh who had
acquired territory around Thānesar after the conquest by Sikhs in 1764 of the
Mughal province of Sirhind. Gurdit Siṅgh, who belonged to the same clan as Raṇjīt
Siṅgh, originally came from the village of Veīṅ Poīṅ, about 15 km south of Amritsar,
and was a member of the Karoṛsiṅghīā misl or confederacy. In addition to his other
acquisitions, Gurdit Siṅgh received in jāgīr from Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh the village of
Baddovāl, near Ludhiāṇā. After Gurdit Siṅgh's death, Ajīt Siṅgh succeeded him as
ruler of the Lāḍvā state. Ajīt Siṅgh, like his father, continued to be an ally of Raṇjīt
Siṅgh in his campaigns of conquest and received favours from him. He built a bridge
over the River Sarasvatī at Thānesar, and received the title of Rājā from Lord
Auckland, the British governor-general of India. In the first Anglo-Sikh war, Ajīt
Siṅgh fought on the side of the Sikhs against the British. He along with Raṇjodh
Siṅgh Majīṭhīā crossed the Sutlej at Phillaur with a force of 8, 000 men and 70 guns.
In rapid marches Ajīt Siṅgh and Raṇjodh Siṅgh seized the forts of Fatehgaṛh,
Dharamkoṭ, and Baddovāl, and stole into Ludhiāṇā cantonment, setting many of the
barracks on fire. In the action fought on 21 January 1846 at Baddovāl, Sir Henry
Smith's column was attacked and more than 200 of his men were slain. But Ajīt
Siṅgh suffered a defeat in the action fought in 'Alīwāl after a week (28 January) and
fled the battlefield. Ajīt Siṅgh's estates were confiscated by the British in 1846 and
he was arrested and detained at Allāhābād. He, however, contrived to escape after
killing his keeper and after long wanderings is supposed to have died in Kashmīr.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Sūrī, Sohan Lāl, 'Umdāt-ut-Twārīkh. Lahore, 1885-89
Griffin, Lepel, The Rajas of the Punjab [Reprint]. Delhi, 1971
Harbans Singh, The Heritage of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1983
Sardār Siṅgh Bhāṭīā

AJĪT SIṄGH, SĀHIBZĀDĀ (1687-1705), the eldest son of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, was
born to Mātā Sundarī at Pāoṇṭā on 26 January 1687. The following year, Gurū
Gobind Siṅgh returned with the family to Anandpur where Ajīt Siṅgh was brought up
in the approved Sikh style. He was taught the religious texts, philosophy and history,
and had training in the manly arts such as riding, swordsmanship and archery. He
grew up into a handsome young man, strong, intelligent and a natural leader of
men. Soon after the creation of the Khālsā on 30 March 1699, he had his first test of
skill. A Sikh saṅgat coming from Poṭhohār, northwest Punjab, was attacked and
looted on the way by the Raṅghaṛs of Nūh, a short distance from Anandpur across
the River Sutlej. Gurū Gobind Siṅgh sent Sāhibzādā Ajīt Siṅgh, barely 12 years of
age then, to that village. Ajīt Siṅgh at the head of 100 Sikhs reached there on 23
May 1699, punished the Raṅghaṛs and recovered the looted property. A harder task
was entrusted to him the following year when the hill chiefs supported by imperial
troops attacked Anandpur. Sāhibzādā Ajīt Siṅgh was made responsible for the
defence of Tārāgaṛh Fort which became the first target of attack. This, according to
the Bhaṭṭ Vahīs, happened on 29 August 1700. Ajīt Siṅgh assisted by Bhāī Ude
Siṅgh, a seasoned soldier, repulsed the attack. He also fought valiantly in the battles
of Nirmohgaṛh in October 1700. On 15 March 1701, a saṅgat, column of Sikh
devotees, coming from Daṛap area (present Siālkoṭ district) was waylaid by Gujjars
and Raṅghaṛs. Sāhibzādā Ajīt Siṅgh led a successful expedition against them. As
instructed by Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, he took out (7 March 1703) 100 horsemen to
Bassī, near Hoshiārpur, and rescued a young Brāhmaṇ bride forcibly taken away by
the local Paṭhān chieftain. In the prolonged siege of Anandpur in 1705, Sāhibzādā
Ajīt Siṅgh again displayed his qualities of courage and steadfastness. When, at last,
Anandpur was vacated on the night of 5-6 December 1705, he was given command
of the rearguard. As the besiegers, violating their solemn promises for a safe
conduct to the evacuees, attacked the column, he stoutly engaged them on a hillfeature called Shāhī Ṭibbī until relieved by Bhāī Ude Siṅgh. Ajīt Siṅgh crossed the
Sarsā, then in spate, along with his father, his younger brother, Jujhār Siṅgh, and
some fifty Sikhs. Further reduced in numbers by casualties at the hands of a
pursuing troop from Ropar, the column reached Chamkaur in the evening of 6
December 1705, and took up position in a gaṛhī, high-walled fortified house. The
host, since swelled by reinforcements from Mālerkoṭlā and Sirhind and from among
the local Raṅghaṛs and Gujjars, soon caught up with them and threw a tight ring
around Chamkaur. An unequal but grim battle commenced with the sunrise on 7
December 1705 - in the words of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's Zafarnāmah, a mere forty
defying a million. The besieged, after they had exhausted the meagre stock of
ammunition and arrows, made sallies in batches of five each to engage the
encircling host with sword and spear. Sāhibzādā Ajīt Siṅgh led one of the sallies and
laid down his life fighting in the thick of the battle. Gurdwārā Qatalgaṛh now marks
the spot where he fell, followed by Sāhibzādā Jujhār Siṅgh, who led the next sally.
An annual fair is held in commemoration of their martyrdoms on the 8th of the
Bikramī month of Poh (December-January). The martyrdom of two of the sons of
Gurū Gobind Siṅgh in the battle of Chamkaur is substantiated by a contemporary
record in the form of an official letter preserved in a MS. , Ahkām-i-Ālamgīrī by
Emperor Auraṅgzīb's official letter writer, Mirzā 'Ināyat Ullah Khān Ismi (1653-1725).
The relevant extract from the MS. , translated into English, reads :
Received the letter containing miscellaneous matters including the arrival of
Gobind, the worshipper of Nānak, to a place 12 kos from Sirhind; the despatch of a
force of 700 with artillery and other material; his being besieged and vanquished in

thehavelī [i. e. large walled house] of a zamīndār of village Chamkaur and the killing
of his two sons and other companions; and the capture of his mother and another
son….

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Chhibbar, Kesar Siṅgh Baṅsāvalīnāmā Dasāṅ Pātshāhīāṅ Kā. Chandigarh,
1972
Padam, Piārā Siṅgh, Chār Sāhibzāde. Patiala, 1967
Kuir Siṅgh, Gurbilās Pātshāhī 10. Patiala, 1968
Harbans Singh, Guru Gobind Singh. Chandigarh, 1966
Macauliffe, M. A. , The Sikh Religion. Oxford, 1909
Shamsher Siṅgh Ashok

AJĪT SIṄGH SANDHĀṄVĀLĪĀ (d. 1843), son of Basāvā Siṅgh Sandhāṅvālīā, was a
leading actor in the gruesome drama of intrigue and murder enacted in the Sikh
kingdom following the passing away of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh. One of the younger
generations of the Sandhāṅvālīās, he outstripped his uncles, Atar Siṅgh
Sandhāṅvālīā and Lahiṇā Siṅgh Sandhāṅvālīā, in political ambition and conspiracy. In
1840, on his return from the expedition against the Rājā of Maṇḍī, he joined his
uncles in supporting Rāṇī Chand Kaur's claim against Sher Siṅgh. Fearful of the
Ḍogrā minister, Dhiān Siṅgh, who had supported Mahārājā Sher Siṅgh against Rāṇī
Chand Kaur; Ajīt Siṅgh fled Lahore in January 1841 clandestinely, along with his
jewellery, and arrived in Ludhiāṇā to seek the help and protection of the British
political agent. Meanwhile, his uncle Atar Siṅgh also left Lahore and joined him in
Ludhiāṇā. At this, Sher Siṅgh besieged the Sandhāṅvālīā fortress at Rājā Sāṅsī and
ordered that both Lahiṇā Siṅgh Sandhāṅvālīā and his son, Kehar Siṅgh
Sandhāṅvālīā, be detained in Koṭ Kāṅgṛā.
The Sandhāṅvālīā refugees in the British territory now came out openly against
Mahārājā Sher Siṅgh. They wrote letters inciting the officers of the Khālsā army to
rise against him. Ajīt Siṅgh took the journey to Calcutta to plead with the British
governor-general the cause of Rāṇī Chand Kaur. Eventually, obtaining Mahārājā Sher
Siṅgh's pardon through the good offices of the British, Atar Siṅgh and Ajīt Siṅgh
returned to Lahore in May 1843. The unsuspecting Mahārājā released Lahiṇā Siṅgh
Sandhāṅvālīā and Kehar Siṅgh Sandhāṅvālīā as well and restored all the confiscated
Sandhāṅvālīā fiefs. Ajīt Siṅgh and other Sandhāṅvālīā sardārs, however, nursed
feelings of malice in secret and waited for their opportunity to strike. On 15
September 1843, as Mahārājā Sher Siṅgh was inspecting troops in the Bārādarī of
Shāh Bilāval, Ajīt Siṅgh shot him dead with an English rifle which he cunningly
pretended to present to the Mahārājā for inspection. As the Mahārājā fell, Ajīt Siṅgh
drew his sword and severed his head. The senior Sandhāṅvālīā Lahiṇā Siṅgh
murdered, in a garden close by, the Mahārājā's minor son, Kaṅvar Partāp Siṅgh.
Later, inside the Lahore Fort, while apportioning the office of prime minister among
themselves, Ajīt Siṅgh killed Dhiān Siṅgh on the spot. Hīrā Siṅgh, son of Dhiān
Siṅgh, and his uncle, Suchet Siṅgh, aroused a section of the army, and with General
Avitabile's crack battalions, they besieged the Fort on 16 September 1843, and in
the resultant action both Ajīt Siṅgh and Lahiṇā Siṅgh were slain. Their heads were
cut off and bodies quartered and hung on the different gates of the city. At Rājā
Sāṅsī the Sandhāṅvālīā fort was razed to the ground, and the houses of all
Sandhāṅvālīā chiefs were destroyed. It was then ordered that henceforth all
Sandhāṅvālīā lands be ploughed with asses instead of oxen. The only Sandhāṅvālīā
chief to escape retribution was Atar Siṅgh who fled from Ūnā to the British territory.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Sūrī, Sohan Lāl, 'Umdāt-ut-Twārīkh. Lahore, 1885-89
Griffin, Lepel and C. F. Massy, Chiefs and Families of Note in the Punjab.
Lahore, 1909
Chopra, Barkat Rai, Kingdom of the Punjab. Hoshiarpur, 1969
Chopra, Gulshan Lall, The Panjab as a Sovereign State. Hoshiarpur, 1960
Harbans Singh, The Heritage of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1983
B. J. Hasrat

AJITTĀ, BHĀĪ, a Randhāvā Jaṭṭ, whose name occurs in Bhāī Gurdās's roster of
prominent Sikhs of Gurū Nānak, Vārāṅ, XI. 14, was a resident of the village of
Pakkhoke Randhāve, close to the present town of Ḍerā Bābā Nānak in Gurdāspur
district of the Punjab. It was at Pakkhoke Randhāve that Gurū Nānak's wife and
children stayed with his parents-in-law after he had left home to go out to preach his
word. Ajittā first met Gurū Nānak as he arrived in his village at the conclusion of his
long travels and sat near the well owned by him. Ajittā was instantly converted and
sought instruction from the Gurū. Bhāī Manī Siṅgh, Sikhāṅ dī Bhagat Mālā, records
the discourse that took place between them.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Manī Siṅgh, Bhāī, Sikhāṅ di Bhagat Mālā. Amritsar, 1955
Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Twārīkh Gurū Khālsā [Reprint]. Patiala, 1970
Bhallā, Sarūp Dās, Mahimā Prakāsh. Patiala, 1971
Harbans Singh, Guru Nanak and Origins of the Sikh Faith. Bombay, 1969
Gurnek Siṅgh

AJMER CHAND, ruler of Kahlūr (Bilāspur), one of the princely states in the Śivāliks.
He succeeded his father, Rājā Bhīm Chand, who had retired in his favour. Bhim
Chand had led battles against Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, and his son, Ajmer Chand,
continued the hostility. He formed a league of the hill chieftains and solicited help
from Emperor Auraṅgzīb in order to evict Gurū Gobind Siṅgh from Anandpur which
fell within his territory. Their attacks upon Anandpur in 1700 and 1703 proved
abortive, but Gurū Gobind Siṅgh had to evacuate the citadel in 1705 under pressure
of a prolonged siege. Ajmer Chand joined the imperial troops in their pursuit of the
Gurū up to Chamkaur.
Ajmer Chand died in 1738.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Kuir Siṅgh, Gurbilās Pātshāhī 10. Patiala, 1968
Hutchinson, J. , and J. Ph. Vogel, History of the Punjab Hill States. Lahore,
1933
Harbans Singh, Guru Gobind Singh. Chandigarh, 1966
Macauliffe, Max Arthur, The Sikh Religion. Oxford, 1909
K. S. Thāpar

AJMER SIṄGH was the name given a seventeenth-century Muslim recluse of
Chhatteāṇā, a village in present-day Farīdkoṭ district of the Punjab, as he received
the initiatory rites of the Khālsā. His original name was Ibrāhīm, popularly shortened
to Brahmī or Bahmī. According to an old chronicle, Mālvā Desh Raṭan di Sākhī Pothī,
Ibrāhīm had himself dug a grave, duly lined with brick and mortar into which he
intended to descend, through a hole he had kept for the purpose, when his time
came. But when he met Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, who had come to Chhatteāṇā after the
battle of Muktsar (1705), he was so deeply moved that he requested to be admitted
to the Khālsā fold. The Gurū, says Bhāī Santokh Siṅgh, Srī Gur Pratāp Sūraj Granth,
observed, "Being a Muslim desiring with conviction to join the Khālsā Panth, you are
setting a good example. Among the Khālsā it is only proper that every one, high or
low, take the pāhul (baptism of the double-edged sword). " Ibrāhīm received the
pāhul at the hands of Bhāī Mān Siṅgh, and the Gurū gave him his new name, Ajmer
Siṅgh. Ajmer Siṅgh diligently learnt the Sikh prayers which he regularly recited
morning and evening.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Mālvā Desh Raṭan dī Sākhī Pothī. Amritsar, 1968
Santokh Siṅgh, Bhāī, Srī Gur Pratāp Sūraj GranthAmritsar, 1927-35
Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Twārīkh Gurū Khālsā [Reprint]. Patiala, 1970
Piārā Siṅgh Padam

AJṚĀṆĀ KALĀṄ, village in Kurukshetra district of Haryāṇā, 12 km south-west of
Shāhābād (30-10'N, 76-53'E), is sacred to Gurū Tegh Bahādur who stopped here in
1670 while on his way from Delhi to join his family at Lakhnaur. A Mañjī Sāhīb
established to commemorate the visit of the Gurū exists on the southern side of the
village. It consists of a small octagonal domed structure, built on a wider base. The
Gurdwārā is administered privately by a Sikh family of the village. A civil suit for the
control of the shrine is going on between this family and the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā
Parbandhak Committee as represented by the Gurdwārā Committee of Shāhābād.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Faujā Siṅgh, Gurū Teg Bahādur, Yātrā Asthān, Pramprāvāṅ te Yād Chinn. Patiala,
1976
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AJUDHIĀ PARSHĀD, DĪWĀN (1799-1870), soldier and civil administrator in Sikh
times, was the adopted son of Dīwān Gaṅgā Rām. Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh first
employed Ajudhiā Parshād in 1819 to serve in the military office in Kashmīr. Three
years later, he was recalled to Lahore and appointed paymaster of the special
brigade (Fauj-i-Khās), organized by Generals Allard and Ventura. After the death in
1826 of Dīwān Gaṅgā Rām, Ajudhiā Parshād received the title of Dīwān and was
assigned to a variety of duties. As a protocol officer, he received in 1831 Alexander
Burnes at Multān. In 1839, he accompanied the army of the Indus under Sir John
Keane. Later, in 1840, he took charge of the Fauj-i-Khās and in 1843, he became its
permanent commander. At the end of the Anglo-Sikh war in February 1846, when
the Sikh army crossed the Sutlej to wage war with the British, he resigned. However,
after the treaty of 16 March 1846, he was assigned, along with Captain Abbott to
demarcating the boundary between Kashmīr and the Punjab. The British government
granted him an annual pension of 7, 500 rupees. From April 1849 to September
1851, he remained on duty with the deposed young prince, Duleep Siṅgh.
Dīwān Ajudhiā Parshād has chronicled in Persian prose the events of the first
Anglo-Sikh war (1845-46). The narrative, an eyewitness account of the battles of
Pherūshahr and Sabhrāoṅ, has been translated into English by V. S. Sūrī and
published under the title Waqāi-Jaṅg-i-Sikhāṅ.
Ajudhiā Parshād died in 1870.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Sūrī, Sohan Lāl 'Umdāt-ut-Twārīkh. Lahore, 1885-89
Griffin, Lepel, and C. F. Massy, Chiefs and Families of Note in the Punjab.
Lahore, 1909
Gupta, Hari Ram, Punjab on the Eve of the First Sikh War. Chandigarh, 1956
Sūrī, V. S. , ed. , Waqāi-Jaṅg-i-Sikhāṅ. Chandigarh, 1975
Harī Rām Gupta

AKĀL, lit. timeless, immortal, non-temporal, is a term integral to Sikh tradition and
philosophy. It is extensively used in the Dasam Granth hymns by Gurū Gobind Siṅgh,
where in one of his poetic compositions is know asAkāl Ustati, i. e. In Praise (ustati)
of the Timeless One (akāl). However, the concept of Akāl is not peculiar to the
Dasam Granth. It goes back to the very origins of the Sikh faith. Gurū Nānak used
the term in the Mūl Mantra, the fundamental creedal statement in the Japu, the first
composition in the Gurū Granth Sāhib. The term also occurs in Gurū Rām Dās,
Nānak IV, who uses it in conjunction with mūrat in Sirī Rāga chhants (GG, 78) and in
conjunction with purakh in Gauṛī Pūrabī Karhale (GG, 235). The term occurs more
frequently in Gurū Arjan's bāṇī (e. g. GG, 99, 609, 916, 1079 and 1082). We
encounter the use of the term akālin Kabīr as well.
It may be noted that the term akāl has been used in Gurbāṇī in two forms : (a)
as a qualifier or adjective, and (b) as a substantive. In the expression akāl mūrati,
the first part is often treated as a qualifier, even though some interpreters take the
two words as independent units, viz. akāl and mūrati. In the Mārū Rāga Kāl and Akāl
have been clearly used as substantives by Gurū Arjan and Kabīr. Gurū Gobind Siṅgh
more often than not treats the expression as a noun. Akāl Ustati is the praise of Akāl
and "Hail, O Akāl, Hail, O Kirpāl!" of Jāpu also takes the related expressions as
substantives. The meaning of Akāl in this context is 'timeless', 'non-temporal',
deathless', 'not governed by temporal process', or 'not subject to birth, decay and
death'. This appears to be negative coining in each case. But the intent is
affirmative. Akāl as deathless or non-temporal implies everlasting reality, eternal
being, or Transcendent Spirit; it further implies Eternity, Being, or Essence. The
linguistic form may be negative, but the semantic implication is unmistakably
affirmative.
Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, in his Jāpu in the Dasam Granth, has designated the
Supreme Reality Akāl. It is the same Reality that was given the epithet of sati in the
Gurū Granth Sāhib. 'Sati' is the primordial name of the Eternal Being (GG, 1083). All
the names that we utter in respect of God are functional or attributive names. The
basic reality is nameless, in Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's terminology anāma. But even the
Nameless can serve as a name. When we say Brahman is featureless,
'featurelessness' becomes its feature. Niraṅkār (Formless) is a name, and so are
other epithets so coined. To signify what they regard as the Eternal Spirit, beyond
the pale of time, temporality or cosmic processes, the Gurūs have chosen the terms
sati and akāl. Vāhigurū is a positive saguṇa substitute for the negative nirguṇa term
Akāl.
Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's bāṇī is a repository of concepts and terms, especially of
the epithets relating to 'time'. Besides Kāl and Akāl, he uses Mahā Kāl (macro-time)
and Sarb-Kāl (all-time) to indicate a Being above and beyond the eventful times of
the universe. For him, Kāl itself is a dimension of Akāl, the only difference being the
process that characterizes temporal events, and the eternality of Akāl. Every
occurrence or event has a beginning and an end, each event is a link in the on-going
process of Time. The cosmic drama or the wondrous show of the world is all a
creation of Time. The power of Time controls worldly events; the only entity
independent of time is Time itself, and that is Akāl, the Timeless One. That is how
God is both Time and Timeless in Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's bāṇī. The temporal aspect of
Time is the immanent aspect, the presence of Spiritual Essence in each worldly
occurrence. It is the personality of the Supreme, the chit or consciousness of sat-

chit-anand. The other, transcendent aspect, is the Eternal, the Beyond, the

Inexpressible, the Fathomless, Nirguṇa Brahman, assigned the name Akāl, the
Timeless One or the One-beyond-Time.

Akāl is not a fixed, unmoving substance, but the dynamic spiritual principle of
the entire cosmic existence. The phenomenal world emanates from Spirit, and the
Spirit permeates the world. Akāl in Sikh weltanschauung is not mere consciousness,
blank and void, but is the Creative Spirit, as the expression Kartā Purakh implies. In
other words, creativity is the core of Akāl. And it is creativity that is manifest in the
dimension of Kāl. Acting through Time, the Timeless One creates worlds and beings
of the worlds. It is through creativity that the Timeless One transforms itself from
nirguṇ to sarguṇ, from the aphur state into saphur state, from the pre-creation
sunn, or dormant essence, into cosmic existence.
The creativity of Akāl is not confined to the timeless and temporal aspects of
the Supreme. Through its sarguṇ facet the nirguṇ assumes the character of the
Divine, of the gracious God, the loving Lord or Prabhu of the devotees. From 'It' the
Ultimate becomes 'He', the person with whom communication is sought and
established. From 'Akāl', He becomes 'Srī-Akāl'. The Sikh slogan and popular form of
greeting Sati Srī Akāl sums up the concept that the timeless Being is the singular
Eternal Reality. The phrase combines the concepts of Sati and Akāl, implying that
the Eternal and the Timeless are one; Sati itself is the Everlasting Lord beyond-Time.
Thus, the creative essence turns the metaphysical Being into active principle of the
world, into conscious Power involved in the cosmic process, into Hero or Master of
the world, cherishing His creation with benign joy. Being the beneficent Lord, He
lends some of His creativity to the created beings. Humanity draws its creativity and
creative energy from the Divine reservoir of creativity.
Valour and heroism are pronounced characteristics of the Sikh tradition. The
Akāl of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh is All Steel (Sarb-Loh), symbolically applauding valour.
Gurū Nānak had applied the epithet of Jodhā-Māhābalī-Sūrmā to the valiant in Japu,
27 (GG, 6). Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, Nānak X, expresses His creativities with terms such
as Sarb-Kāl (Jāpu, 19, 20, ), Sarb-Dayāl (Jāpu, 19, 23, 28), Sarb-Pāl (Jāpu, 28, 45).
He calls Him Glorious and great, Super-form, Yogī of yogīs, Moon of moons, Melody
of melodies, Rhythm of the dance, Liquidity of waters, Movement of the winds. He is
Akāl as well as Kripāl, the Compassionate Lord. In fact, the whole composition of
Jāpu, with its wide range of attributive names for the Timeless Being focusses on the
Akāl-Kripāl unipolarity. The Impersonal appears through all persons, the Timeless
encompasses all temporal beings emanating from His Essence. He transcends the
human world, yet He is full of compassion for all. His timeless essence permeates
the temporal existence.
The concept of Akāl, central to Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's Jāpu has percolated to the
social, political and cultural aspects of Sikh life. Inspired by its theme, they call the
Gurūs' bāṇī, Akālī Bāṇī. The political wing of the community is known as Akālī Dal.
The slogan Sati Srī Akāl has become a form of greeting for the Punjabis in general.
The process had been initiated much earlier, half a century before the advent of
Gurū Gobind Siṅgh on the scene. The Sixth Gurū, Gurū Hargobind, had already
identified the throne built at Amritsar as Akāl Takht--the Throne of the Timeless
One.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Kapur Singh, Pārāśarapraśna [Reprint]. Amritsar, 1989
Gopal Singh, Thus Spake the Tenth Master. Patiala, 1978
Talib, Gurbachan Singh, Selections from the Holy Granth. Delhi, 1982
Jodh Siṅgh, Bhāī, Gurmati Nirṇaya. Lahore, 1945
Wazir Siṅgh

ĀKAL, BHĀĪ, a carpenter resident of Vaḍḍā Ghar in present-day Farīdkoṭ district of
the Punjab and, according to Gurbilās Chhevīṅ Pātshāhī, maternal grandfather of the
celebrated Bhāī Rūp Chand, became a devotee of Gurū Rām Dās. He also served
Gurū Arjan and Gurū Hargobind. He was a man of devotion and piety.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Gurbilās Chhevīṅ Pātshāhī . Patiala, 1970
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AKĀL BUṄGĀ, lit. the abode of the Timeless One, is the building that houses the Akāl
Takht in the precincts of the Darbār Sāhib at Amritsar. The term is also used
sometimes synonymously with Akāl Takht. Strictly speaking, while Akāl Takht is the
institution possessing and exercising the highest religious authority for Sikhs, Akāl
Buṅgā is the historical Gurdwārā where Akāl Takht is located.

See AKĀL TAKHT and AMRITSAR
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Twārīkh Srī Amritsar. Amritsar, 1977
Sukhdiāl Siṅgh, Akāl Takht Sāhib. Patiala, 1984
Gurbilās Chhevīṅ Pātshāhī. Patiala, 1970
Dilgeer, Harjinder Siṅgh, The Akal Takht, Jalandhar, 1980
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AKĀL MŪRATI, a composite term comprising akāl (non-temporal) and mūrati (image
or form), occuring in the Mūl-Mantra, the root formula or fundamental creed of the
Sikh faith as recorded at the beginning of the Japu, composition with which the Gurū
Granth Sāhib opens, literally means 'timeless image'. Elsewhere, in the compositions
of Gurū Rām Dās (GG, 78), and Gurū Arjan (GG, 99, 609, 916 and 1082), the
expression Akāl Mūrati reinforces the original meaning of Divine Reality that is
beyond the process of time, and yet permeates the cosmic forms. The non-temporal
Being transcends the space-time framework and, as such, is Formless. However, in
its manifest aspect, the same Being assumes the cosmic Form. The Sikh vision of
God combines the Formless and its expression in natural forms, the transcendent
and the immanent, the essence (spirit) and existence (creation).
The expression 'Akāl Mūrati' lends itself to interpretation in two ways. The
exegetes, who treat it as one term, take akāl in the adjectival form that qualifies the
substantive mūrati, the whole expression implying Everlasting Form equivalent to the
Supreme Being. Those approaching the pair akāl and mūrati severally, treat both the
units independently, each expressing an attribute of the Divine Reality, believed to
transcend time and space, yet manifest in spacio-temporal forms. But, despite the
divergence of approach, both interpretations agree in substance, i. e. the featureless
eternal Reality assumes features and modes of empirical existence. To put it
differently, Akāl Mūrati presents a synthesis of nirguṇ and saguṇ facets of the
Absolute-God of Gurū Nānak's vision. It however does not embrace the notion of
incarnation. Non-incarnation is a basic theological postulate of Sikhism.

See AKĀL
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Talib, Gurbachan Singh, Japuji -The Immortal Sikh Prayer-chant. Delhi, 1977
Trilochan Singh, "Theological Concepts of Sikhism, in Sikhism. Patiala, 1969
Sher Singh, The Philosophy of Sikhism. Lahore, 1944
Jodh Siṅgh, Gurmati Nirṇaya. Ludhiana, 1932
Wazir Siṅgh

AKĀL TAKHT is the primary seat of Sikh religious authority and central altar for Sikh
political assembly. Through hukamnāmās, edicts or writs, it may issue decretals
providing guidance or clarification on any point of Sikh doctrine or practice referred
to it, may lay under penance personages charged with violation of religious discipline
or with activity prejudicial to Sikh interests or solidarity and may place on record its
appreciation of outstanding services rendered or sacrifices made by individuals
espousing the case of Sikhism or of the Sikhs. The edifice stands in the Darbār Sāhib
precincts in Amritsar facing Harimandar, now famous as the Golden Temple. The
word akāl, a negative of kāl (time), is the equivalent of timeless, beyond time,
everlasting, and takht, in Persian, that of royal throne or chair of state. Akāl Takht
would thus mean "timeless or everlasting throne" or "throne of the Timeless One, i.
e. God. " In the Sikh system, God is postulated as Formless (Niraṅkār), yet to
proclaim His sovereignty over His creation, He is sometimes referred to as sultān,
pātsāh, sāchā sāh, or the True King ; His seat is referred to as sachchā takht, the
True Throne, sitting on which He dispenses sachchā niāo, true justice (GG, 84,
1087). It also became common for Sikhs, at least by the time of Gurū Arjan (15631606), to refer to the Gurū as sachchā patshāh and to his gaddī or spiritual seat as
takht and the congregation he led as darbār or court. Panegyrizing the Gurūs, the
bards Balvaṇḍ, Nalya and Mathurā, in their verses included in the Gurū Granth
Sāhib, use the word takht in this very sense. Formally to proclaim Sikh faith's
common concern for the spiritual and the worldly, synthesis of mīrī and pīrī, Gurū
Hargobind (1595-1644), son and successor of Gurū Arjan, adopted royal style. For
the ceremonies of succession, he had a platform constructed opposite the
Harimandar, naming it Akāl Takht. According to Gurbilās Chhevīṅ Pātshāhī, a
detailed versified and, going by the year of composition recorded in the
text/colophon, the oldest account of Gurū Hargobind's life, the structure was raised
on Hāṛ vadī 5, 1663 Bk/15 June 1606. The Gurū laid the cornerstone and Bhāī
Buḍḍhā and Bhāī Gurdās completed the construction, no third person being allowed
to lend a helping hand. Gurū Hargobind used the takht for the accession ceremonies
which, according to the source quoted, took place on 26 Hāṛ sudī 10, 1663 Bk/24
June 1606. From here he conducted the secular affairs of the community. From here
he is said to have issued the first hukamnāmā (q. v. ) to far-flung saṅgats or Sikh
centres announcing the creation of Akāl Takht and asking them to include in their
offerings thenceforth gifts of weapons and horses. Bhāī Gurdās was named officiant
in charge of the Akāl Takht. A building subsequently raised over the Takht was
called Akāl Buṅgā (house) so that the Takht is now officially known as Takht Srī Akāl
Buṅgā although its popular name Akāl Takht is more in common use.
The Sikhs recognize four other holy places as takhts, namely Takht Srī Kesgaṛh
Sāhib, Anandpur; Takht Srī Harimandar Sāhib, Paṭnā Takht Sachkhaṇḍ Hazūr Sāhib,
Abchalnagar, Nāndeḍ and Takht Srī Damdamā Sāhib, Talvaṇḍī Sābo. All four are
connected with the life of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh (1666-1708). All five Takhts are
equally venerated, but the Akāl Takht at Amritsar enjoys a special status.
Historically, this is the oldest of the takhts and along with Harimandar, across the
yard, constitutes the capital of Sikhism. Meetings of the Sarbatt Khālsā or general
assembly representative of the entire Panth are traditionally summoned at Akāl
Takht and it is only there that cases connected with serious religious offences
committed by prominent Sikhs are heard and decided. Hukamnāmās or decrees
issued by the Akāl Takht are universally applicable to all Sikhs and all institutions.

After Gurū Hargobind's migration to Kīratpur early in 1635, the shrines at
Amritsar, including the Akāl Takht, fell into the hands of the descendants of Prithī
Chand, elder brother of Gurū Arjan, his grandson, Harijī (d. 1696), remaining in
charge for over fifty-five years. Soon after the creation of the Khālsā in March 1699,
Gurū Gobind Siṅgh sent Bhāī Manī Siṅgh to Amritsar to assume control of the
Harimandar and the Akāl Takht and manage these on behalf of the Khālsā Panth.
During the troublous period following the martyrdom of Bandā Siṅgh in 1716, the
sacred sarovar, or holy tank, at Amritsar, the Harimandar and the Akāl Takht
continued to be a source of inspiration and spiritual rejuvenation for the Sikhs.
Whenever circumstances permitted, and usually on Baisākhī and Dīvālī, their
scattered bands defying all hazards converged upon Akāl Takht to hold Sarbatt
Khālsā assemblies and discuss matters of policy and strategy. For instance, through
a gurmatā (Gurū's counsel) the sarbatt khālsā at the Akāl Takht resolved on 14
October 1745 to reorganize their scattered fighting force into 25, jathās or bands of
about 100 warriors each. By another gurmatā on Baisākhī, 29 March 1748, the
sarbatt khālsā meeting, again, at Akāl Takht, formed the Dal khālsā or the army of
the Khālsā consisting of 11 misls or divisions. On Dīvālī, 7 November 1760, the
sarbatt khālsā resolved to attack and occupy Lahore (till then Sikhs had not occupied
any territory, their only possession being the small fortress of Rām Rauṇī or
Rāmgaṛh they had built at Amritsar in 1746). Akāl Takht was again the venue of the
sarbatt khālsā on Baisākhī day, 10 April 1763, when by a gurmatā it was decided to
go out to the help of a Brāhmaṇ who had brought the complaint that his wife had
been forcibly abducted by the Afghān chief of Kasūr.
Even after the Punjab had been parcelled out into several Sikh independencies
or misls , Amritsar remained the common capital where all sardārs or chiefs had built
their buṅgās and stationed their vakils or agents. But as the need for a common
strategy and action decreased and rivalries among the misl chiefs raised their head,
sarbatt khālsā and correspondingly the Akāl Takht lost their political pre-eminence.
Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh felt little need for sarbatt khālsā assemblies after 1805 when
it was summoned to consider the question whether or not the fugitive Marāṭhā
prince Jasvant Rāo Holkar be assisted against the British. The religious authority of
the Akāl Takht, however, remained intact and the State never challenged it in any
manner. There are in fact instances of the State showing subservience as in the case
of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh himself responding to the summons from the Akāl Takht
and accepting for a moral misdemeanour penalty imposed by its custodian, Akālī
Phūlā Siṅgh who had fought as a loyal soldier in several of the Mahārājā's military
campaigns. In spite of its supremacy in the matter of enforcing religious discipline,
Akāl Takht discharges no divine dispensation. It remits no sins, nor does it invoke
God's wrath upon anyone.
On several occasions during the eighteenth century, Akāl Takht shared with
the Harimandar desecration and destruction at the hands of Mughal satraps and
Afghān invaders. Ahmad Shāh Durrānī, who had razed the Harimandar in 1762,
again attacked Amritsar in December 1764. On this occasion a small band of 30
Sikhs under their leader, Nihaṅg Gurbakhsh Siṅgh stationed there to serve and
protect the Akāl Takht, came out to dare the invading horde and fell fighting to the
last man. Ahmad Shāh had the Akāl Buṅgā completely demolished. Sikhs, however,
continued to hold the sarbatt khālsā in front of the ruins and decided at one such
gathering on Baisākhī, 10 April 1765, to rebuild the Akāl Buṅgā as well as the
Harimandar. Funds for this purpose had already been set apart from the pillage of

Sirhind in January 1764. The work was entrusted to Bhāī Des Rāj, who was also
furnished with Gurū kī Mohar or the Gurū's seal to enable him to raise more funds.
The construction of the ground floor of the Akāl Buṅgā was completed by 1774. The
rest of the five-storeyed domed edifice was completed during the reign of Mahārājā
Raṇjīt Siṅgh. The gilded dome atop the building was built by Harī Siṅgh Nalvā at his
own expense. The facade of the first four storeys including the basement (originally
ground floor but rendered partly below ground level because of the raising of the
level of the circumambulatory terrace in front) had a semi-circular orientation. The
ground floor was a large hall with an attached pillared marble portico. The facades
of the next two floors had projected eaves supported on decorative brackets. The
façade of the third floor, a large hall with galleries on the sides, had cusped arched
openings, nine in number. The exterior of the fourth floor, covering the central hall
of the lower floor, was decorated with projected ornamental eaves and a domed
kiosk at each corner. The Gurū Granth Sāhib was seated on the first floor, where the
jathedār of the Akāl Takht also took his seat. The second floor was used for
important meetings and also for amrit prachār, administration of the initiation of the
Khālsā. The hall on the third floor was used especially for the meetings of the
Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee until a separate office block, called Tejā
Siṅgh Samundāri Hall, was constructed for the purpose during the 1930's.
The beautiful and sacred edifice was destroyed in the army action, called
Operation Blue Star, in early June 1984. The Government of India got the building
reconstructed in order to assuage the injured feelings of the Sikhs, but this was not
acceptable to them. The reconstructed building was demolished in early 1986 to be
replaced by one raised through kār sevā, voluntary free service of the Panth and by
money accruing from voluntary donations.
After the death of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh with whom ceased the line of living
Gurūs, hukamnāmās were issued in the name of the Khālsā Panth from the different
takhts, especially Akāl Takht at Amritsar. Any Sikh transgressing the religious code
could be summoned, asked to explain his conduct and punished. Disobedience
amounted to social ostracism of an individual or the group concerned. Mahārājā
Raṇjīt Siṅgh, 19th century ruler of the Punjab, was summoned by Akālī Phūlā Siṅgh,
the then jathedār of Akāl Takht, for violating established norms of Sikh behaviour
and laid under expiation. Among instances from recent history a striking one is that
of Tejā Siṅgh of Bhasauṛ who was censured for the liberties he was taking with the
Sikh canon. A hukamnāmā issued from the Akāl Takht on 26 Sāvaṇ 1985 Bk/9
August 1928 read:
The Pañch Khālsā Dīwān (Pañch Khaṇḍ), Bhasauṛ, has published books called
Gurmukhī courses in which the bāṇī of Srī Gurū Granth Sāhib has been garbled and
its order changed.
Changes have been made in gurmantra, the ardās and the ceremonies for
administering amrit. These are anti-Sikh proceedings. Hence Bābū Tejā Siṅgh and
Bībī Nirañjan Kaur [his wife] are hereby excommunicated from the Panth. Other
members of the Pañch Khālsā Dīwān are debarred from having ardās offered on
their behalf at Srī Akāl Takht Sāhib or at any other Gurdwārā. No Sikh should
purchase Gurmukhī courses published by the Pañch Khālsā Dīwān, nor keep them in
his possession. The Pañch Khālsā Dīwān or whoever else has copies of these should
send them to Srī Akāl Takht Sāhib.

An example of an individual penalized for disobeying the Akāl Takht edict was
that of Bhāī Santā Siṅgh, the Nihaṅg, who for the charge brought against him was
excommunicated from the Panth (Hukamnāmā, 8 Sāvan 515 Nānak Shāhī/22 July
1984). Hukamnāmās have also been issued to settle points of religious and political
disputation; also for commending the services to the Panth of individuals and for
adding passages to Sikh ardās, the daily prayer of supplication, as a particular
historical situation might demand. On 26 Jeṭh 1984 Bk/8 June 1927, the Akāl Takht
eulogized in a hukamnāmā Bhāī Sāhib Sardār Khaṛak Siṅgh for his qualities of
determination and steadfastness and for his sacrifices in the cause of the Panth;
likewise, on 30 Bhādoṅ 1988 Bk/15 September 1931, Bhāī Sāhib Raṇdhīr Siṅgh was
honoured for his outstanding services to the Panth. On 20 Asūj 1970 Bk/4 October
1913, Takht Sachkhaṇḍ Srī Hazūr Sāhib promulgated a hukamnāmā fixing the length
of kirpān or sword a Sikh will carry slung from across his shoulder at a minimum of
one foot. On 12 Māgh 483 Nānak Shāhī/25 January 1952, Akāl Takht enjoined upon
the "entire Khālsā and all Gurdwārā ministers'' to add these lines to the ardās:
O Timeless Lord, the Benevolent One, ever the succourer of Thy Panth, we
pray grant the Khālsājī the privilege of unhindered access to and control and
maintenance of Srī Nankāṇā Sāhib and other holy shrines and sites from which the
Panth has been parted [after the partition of the Punjab in 1947].
Such writs promulgated under the seal of a Takht carry sanction for the entire
Sikh people.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Gordon, John J. H. , The Sikhs. Patiala, 1970
Dilgeer, Harjinder Siṅgh, The Akal Takht. Jalandhar, 1980
Kapur Siṅgh, "Akal Takht, " in The Sikh Sansar. June 1976
Harbans Singh, The Heritage of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1983
Sukhdiāl Siṅgh, Akāl Takht Sāhib. Patiala, 1984
Giān Singh, Giānī, Twārīkh Gurū Khālsā [Reprint]. Patiala, 1970
Gurbilās Chhevīṅ Pātshāhī. Patiala, 1970
Gaṇḍā Siṅgh, Hukamnāme. Patiala, 1967
Ashok, Shamsher Siṅgh, NĪsāṇ te Hukamnāme. Amritsar, 1967
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AKĀL USTATI (In Praise of the Timeless Being) is a poetical composition by Gurū
Gobind Siṅgh in the Dasam Granth. This is the only major composition in the Tenth

Master's Book which is without a title. The title by which it is known is made up of its
first word, Akāl (The Timeless One), and its last word, Ustati (praise). In the
beginning is the note: utar khāse daskhat kā Pātshāhī 10 (a copy of the Tenth
Gurū's own handwriting). After four lines comes the next note: āgai likhārī ke
daskhat (henceforth is the scribe's writing). This shows that in the original text the
first four lines were written in the Gurū's own hand. The bāṇī comprises 271 verses
excluding the first four lines. Twelve different metrical measures have been used.
The language of Akāl Ustati is Braj Bhāṣā written in Gurmukhī characters. The dates
given for its composition are1684 for the opening section, and 1691 for the
remainder. Its final compilation came much later, about 1735, when Bhāī Manī Siṅgh
prepared the first copy of the Dasam Granth.
The main theme of the poem is praise of the Timeless Eternal Being. In the
opening invocation, God is addressed as Timeless Being, All-steel, "the
personification and source of chivalry. " He also is the Transcendent "Being, distinct
from all the world" (verse 9). Ten savaīyyās follow. These four-line verses warn that
religious books and rites, rigorous asceticism or worldly pomp and power are useless
without the love and favour of God (verses 21-30). The great God Hari is described
at length in transcendent terms as the Omnipotent Creator and Sustainer of the
universe. Austere ascetic feats, ceremonies, pilgrimages are performed by devotees
everywhere, but the conclusion is:
Know that all such things are vain,
And that all such devotion is fruitless,
Without the support of the One Name,
Deem all religious ceremonies as superstition.
(verses 31-50)

Then God's omnipresence is sung, " Thou art in the earth, Thou art in the
firmament, " ending in a burst of devotional fervour when "Tū hī! Tū hī! (Thou alone
art)" is repeated 16 times (verses 69-70). In the midst of another long portrayal of
true and false conception of God, the unity of mankind before the Creator is thus
emphasized :
He is in the temple as He is in the mosque;
He is in the Hindu worship as He is in the Muslim prayer
Men are one though they appear different. . .
The Hindus and the Muslims are all one,
Have each the habits of different environments,

But all men have the same eyes, the same body. . .
Thus the Abhekh of the Hindus and the Allah of the Muslims are one,
The Qura'n and the Purāṇas praise the same Lord.
They are all of one form,
The One Lord made them all.
(verse 86)

About a third of the poem is a satire on false methods of worship; but it is
satire with the kindly purpose of showing that true praise is an inner state consisting
of heartfelt devotion to the One Supreme Creator. Satire, then, is the means to carry
out the divinely given mission. Then God is again described mostly in negative terms
(verses 91-200) and is to be found, not by austerities, but by worship of Him as the
Treasury of Grace (verse 59), for God is Love, Holiness, Virtue, and Omnipotence
(verse 172). A series of questions and riddles much in the nature of a religious
catechism follow (verses 201-10).
The final section is a veritable paean of praise. People the world over are
included, as the Gurū mentions, among the seekers after God, the people of Arabia
and of France, the Qandahārīs, the Qureshīs, the Westerners, the Marāṭhās, the
Bihārīs, the Oṛiyās, the Beṅgālīs, the English, the residents of Delhi, the Gurkhās, the
Chinese, Manchurians, Tibetans, the Easterners of Kāmrūp and Kumāūṅ - all these
were blessed as they sang the praises of the One Lord (verses 254-71).
In Oriental imagery His praise is likened to milk, buttermilk, moonlight on the
Yamunā, crystal mirrors, swans, cranes, the Ganges, until finally:
His splendour appeareth everywhere,
He is the treasury of favour,
His light dazzleth, His glory is perfect.
The sky and the earth repeat His Name.
(verse 271)
The Gurū commences his great work on praise with an invocation to the AllSteel, i. e. God. He ends with the hope of human brotherhood as men throughout
the world seek the One God and sing His praises.
The Ustati overflows with many of the oft-quoted verses and stanzas of Gurū
Gobind Siṅgh. It presents a mixture of devotional lyrics and philosophical reflections.
It is composed in a style which is a blend of grandeur and beauty. Diction and style
of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh are unique : no resemblance of these is available in Hindi or

Punjabi literature. The main source of his vocabulary, in this text, is Sanskrit, though
in some of his other compositions the Gurū has made free use of Perso-Arabic
words. He uses Sanskrit words in their tadbhav form and has experimented with
formation of new words and compounds. Akāl Ustati, like the Jāpu, is a treasury of
adjectival vocabulary.
Many of these adjectives are of fresh coinage. A rich variety of poetic metres
has been used. Some of the metres like kabitt, savaīyyās and dīrgh narāj are
characterized by lengthy verse-forms, while some others like tomar and pādhaṛī by
short ones consisting of no more than two or three words.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Loehlin, C. H. , The Granth of Guru Gobind Singh and the Khalsa Brotherhood.
Lucknow, 1971
Ashta, Dharam Pal, The Poetry of the Dasam Granth. Delhi, 1959
Padam, Piārā Siṅgh, Dasam Granth Darshan. Patiala, 1968.
Jaggī, Rattan Siṅgh, Dasam Granth Parichaya. Delhi, 1990
C. H. Loehlin

AKĀLĪ, a term now appropriated by members of the dominant Sikh political party,
the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal, founded in 1920, and groups splitting from it from time to
time, was earlier used for Nihaṅgs (q. v. ), an order of armed religious zealots
among the baptized Sikhs. The word Nihaṅg is from the Persian Nihaṅg meaning
crocodile, alligator, shark or water dragon, and signifies qualities of ferocity, and
fearlessness. The term Akālī is originally from Akāl, the Timeless One. Gurū Nānak
(1469-1539) described God as Akāl Mūrati, the Eternal Form. Gurū Hargobind (15951644), who adopted a royal style, named his seat at Amritsar Akāl Takht, the
Everlasting Throne. It was, however, Gurū Gobind Siṅgh who popularized the term
Akāl as an attributive name of God. A set of his hymns is entitled Akāl Ustati (God's
Praises). When he instituted, in 1699, the Khālsā, a body of warriors initiated
through baptism of the double-edged sword, he gave them the war-cry "Sat Srī Akāl
!" (the True, the Radiant, the Timeless One). It was probably from this war-cry that
the Siṅghs or initiated Sikhs, variously called Bhujaṅgīs and Nihaṅgs, came also to be
known as Akālīs. Although the Nihaṅgs trace their origin from Sāhibzādā Fateh
Siṅgh, the youngest son of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh or from Bhāī Mān Siṅgh, a Sikh of the
Tenth Gurū, the earliest use of Akālī as a title appears with the name of Naiṇā Siṅgh,
an eighteenth- century Nihaṅg warrior and a junior leader in the Shahīd misl. Akālī
Naiṇā Siṅgh is credited with introducing the tall pyramidal turban common among
the Nihaṅgs to this day. Akālīs became prominent as an organized force under Akālī
Phūlā Siṅgh (d. 1823), one time ward and disciple of Naiṇā Siṅgh. Phūlā Siṅgh's
Akālīs formed the crack brigade in Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh's army as well as the
custodians of the nation's conscience and morals. After the occupation of the Punjab
by the British in 1849, Akālī regiments were disbanded and, military service being
their only career, their numbers dwindled rapidly. In the 1892 census only 1, 376
persons were returned as "Sikh Akālīs or Nihaṅgs, " and in 1901 this number further
came down to a bare 431, besides 136 who registered themselves as Akālīs by
caste. Of these 457 were males and 110 females. During the Gurdwārā reform
movement (1920-25), the term Akālī came to be associated with the reformers who
organized themselves into a political body, the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal. Even the reform
movement itself was referred to as the Akālī movement. A rival body set up in mid1930's also named itself the Central Akālī Dal. The Nihaṅgs are no longer called
Akālīs. The last prominent Nihaṅg known as an Akālī was Akālī Kaur Siṅgh (18861953).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Gulati, Kailash Chander, The Akālīs: Past and Present. Delhi, 1974
Harbans Singh, The Heritage of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1983
Cunningham, J. D. , A History of the Sikhs. London, 1849
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AKĀLĪ DAL, CENTRAL, a political organization of the Sikhs set up in March 1934 as a
parallel body to the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal. The latter was formed on 14 December
1920 to assist the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee in its campaign for
the reformation of the management of the Sikh places of worship and, under
pressure of the agitation it had launched, the Punjab Legislative Council passed on 7
July 1925 the Sikh Gurdwaras Act, providing for a Central Board elected by the Sikhs
to take over control of the shrines. On 9 July 1925, the Governor of the Punjab
announced that such of the Akālī prisoners as accepted the provisions of the Act and
were willing to work by them would be freed. Some of the agitation leaders gave the
required assurance and were released, but 15 of them, including Master Tārā Siṅgh
and Tejā Siṅgh Samundarī refused and preferred to stay back in jail. This split the
Akālīs. Those released tried to capture the Central Board through the first elections
under the Sikh Gurdwaras Act held in June 1926, but could win only 26 out of a total
of 120 seats, 85 going to the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal represented by those still under
detention. Government withdrew the ban on the Akālīs on 27 September 1926 and
the remaining batch of leaders was released from custody. At the first meeting of
the Central Board held on 2 October 1926, Sardār Khaṛak Siṅgh (still in jail convicted
in connection with the Gurū kā Bāgh agitation) and Master Tārā Siṅgh were
unanimously elected president and vice-president, respectively. The Bord, renamed
at that first meeting Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee, assumed charge
of Gurdwārā management on 27 November 1926.
The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal functioned as a well-knit party for the next three years
under the leadership of Bābā Khaṛak Siṅgh, but fissures began to appear in the wake
of elections to the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee in 1930. Bābā
Khaṛak Siṅgh not only resigned the presidentship of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal, but also
left the party along with Sardār Bahādur Mehtāb Siṅgh, Jathedār Kartār Siṅgh
Jhabbar and Harbaṅs Siṅgh Sistānī. Master Tārā Siṅgh took over as president of the
Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal and remained at the helm of Sikh affairs for the next three
decades. The question of constitutional reforms in the country under discussion at
the time prompted the two groups to sink their differences for a while. But the next
Gurdwārā elections coming off in February 1933 brought the differences to the
surface again. At the Sikh National Conference convened at Lahore on 24-25 March
1934, Bābā Khaṛak Siṅgh presiding, the formation of a separate party-at first called
Sikh National League and then renamed Central Akālī Dal was announced. The
Conference, while rejecting the Communal Award as injurious to the Sikhs and to the
cause of inter - communal harmony in the country, demanded 30 per cent
representation for the Sikhs in the Punjab legislature. It exhorted the Sikhs to be
ready to make all possible sacrifices for the achievement of their political objective
and declared that the party would enlist one lakh volunteers for this purpose. Bābā
Khaṛak Siṅgh became president of the Central Akālī Dal, with Amar Siṅgh, editor of
the Sher-i- Punjab, as working president and Giānī Sher Siṅgh and Harbaṅs Siṅgh
Sīstānī as vice-presidents. Among the members of the executive committee were
Jaswant Siṅgh Jhabāl, Master Motā Siṅgh Anandpurī, Gopāl Siṅgh Sāgarī and Jaṅg
Bahādur Siṅgh.
The Central Akālī Dal's major concerns were safeguarding the religious entity
of the Sikhs and ensuring a political status for them in the national setup. With the
Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal it remained in constant conflict, especially because of the latter's
alignment with the Indian National Congress. In the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā
Parbandhak Committee, it formed a strong opposition block led by men of the

stature of Giānī Sher Siṅgh and Amar Siṅgh of the Sher Punjab. It controlled under
the provisions of the Gurdwaras Act some of the important Sikh shrines such as
those at Amritsar (the Golden Temple), Nankāṇā Sāhib and Muktsar. In the 1936-37
general elections under the Government of India Act of 1935, Central Akālī Dal
supported the newly formed Khālsā National Party which had the upper hand as
against the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal. But gradually the influence of the Central Akālī Dal
waned. It convened All-India Akhaṇḍ Hindustān Conference at Lahore on 6 June
1943 to protest against the Muslim League's demand for Pakistan and the Āzād
Punjab scheme sponsored by the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal. It held an Anti-Āzād Punjab
Conference at Paňjā Sāhib on 16 August 1943 and another Akhaṇḍ Hindustān
Conference at Chakvāl on 15 September 1943. One of its last political acts was the
submission of a memorandum to the British Cabinet Mission in 1946. The demands
set forth in the Memorandum included grant of complete independence to a united
India with a strong Centre and without the right for the provinces to secede; the
establishment of a special court to guarantee and safeguard the rights of the
minorities; special representation for the Sikhs in the Constituent Assembly and in
the Central legislature; representation for the Sikhs in the Punjab legislature on an
equal footing with the Hindus and Muslims; joint electorates, with reservation of
seats for the minorities; guarantee for the protection of the religious and cultural
interests of the Sikhs and of their share in the armed forces of the country.
The All-India Sikh League, controlled by the Central Akālī Dal, passed a
resolution in its Lahore session on 4 June 1946 asking the British Government "to fix
a date for the immediate withdrawal of British forces of occupation; to wipe out the
undemocratic feudal and semi-feudal system of Indian states and the privileged
position of the Princes; to limit the over-riding powers of the Viceroy only to foreign
policy during the period of the Interim National Government; to purge the Cabinet
Mission's proposal of the communal virus being injected through the system of
provincial grouping and representation on communal basis; and to take immediate
steps for the liquidation of the Indian debt through the transfer of British vested
interests in finance and industry. . . " It further demanded that the Interim National
Government be composed of elected members of the Central legislature and that
complete sovereignty be granted to the Constituent Assembly without reservation
and limitations.
No efforts were made to revive the Central Akālī Dal in Independent India. One
of its principal architects, Sardār Amar Siṅgh of the Sher-i-Punjab, died on 9 July
1948. Bābā Khaṛak Siṅgh spent last sixteen years of his life in political retirement in
Delhi.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Sarhadi, Ajit Singh, Punjabi Suba. Delhi, 1970
Mohinder Siṅgh, The Akali Movement. Delhi, 1978
Tuteja, K. L. , Sikh Politics. Kurukshetra, 1984
Josh, Sohan Siṅgh, Akālī Morchiāṅ dā Itihās. Delhi, 1972
Dilgeer, Harjinder Siṅgh, Shiromaṇī Akālī DāL. Jalandhar, 1978
Jaṅg Bahādur Siṅgh

AKĀLĪ DAL KHARĀ SAUDĀ BĀR, an organization of Akālī reformers working for the
liberation of Sikh shrines from the control of conservative Udāsī priests or mahants.
The organization was originally called Khālsā Dīwā Kharā Saudā Bār set up in 1912
and comprised volunteers mostly from a cluster of villages inhabited by Virk Jaṭṭ
Sikhs in the Lower Chenāb Canal Colony in Sheikhūpurā district, now in Pakistan.
Canal colonies in West Punjab were usually called bārs, lit. semi-forests, which these
areas really were before the introduction of canal irrigation. The name Kharā Saudā
came from the historical Gurdwārā Sachchā Saudā, also called Kharā Saudā, near
Chūhaṛkāṇā town around which the Virk villages were situated. The Dīwān was in
the beginning purely reformist in its aim, and was engaged in the spread of Sikh
religion and education. But with the heightening up of the political tempo after the
implementation of Rowlatt Acts and particularly after the Jalliāṅvālā Bāgh tragedy in
April 1919, the Dīwān became active politically, too, and came to be called Akālī Dal
Kharā Saudā Bār. The reorganization took place at a convention held at Gurdwārā
Mahārāṇī Nakaiṇ at Sheikhūpurā on 24 December 1920 when Akālī Jathā Kharā
Saudā Bār was set up with Kartār Siṅgh Jhabbar as its Jathedār. Among other topranking leaders were Tejā Siṅgh Chūhaṛkāṇa and Maṅgal Siṅgh Serokā. The Dal
played a leading part in the liberation of several historical gurdwārās, most notable
among them being Bābe dī Ber at Siālkoṭ, Pāňjā Sāhib at Hasan Abdāl, Janam
Asthān at Nankāṇā Sāhib, and Gurdwārā Sachchā Saudā, Chūhaṛkāṇā, where the Dal
had its headquarters. The Dal was ultimately amalgamated with the Shiromaṇi Akālī
Dal (q. v).
Akālī Dal Kharā Saudā Bār worked in close co-operation with the Akālī Jathā of
Bhāī Lachhmaṇ Siṅgh of Dhārovālī, one of the Nankāṇā Sāhib martyrs. According to
the C. I. D. report of 22 February 1922, the "combined membership of these two
jathās of the Sheikhūpurā district is about 2, 200. "
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Naraiṇ Siṅgh, Akālī Morche te Jhabbar. Delhi 1967
Pratāp Siṅgh, Giānī, Gurdwārā Sudhār arthāt Akālī Lahir. Amritsar, 1975
Josh, Sohan Singh Akālī Morchiāṅ da Itīhās. Delhi, 1972
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AKĀLĪ DAL, SHIROMAṆĪ (shiromaṇī = exalted, foremost in rank; dal = corps, of akālī
volunteers who had shed fear of death), the premier political party of the modern
period of Sikhism seeking to protect the political rights of the Sikhs, to represent
them in the public bodies and legislative councils being set up by the British in India
and to preserve and advance their religious heritage, came into existence during the
Gurdwārā reform movement, also known as the Akālī movement, of the early 1920's.
Need for reform in the conditions prevalent in their places of worship had been
brought home to Sikhs by the Siṅgh Sabhā upsurge in the last quarter of the
nineteenth century. It had been increasingly felt that the purity of Sikh precept and
practice could not be recovered unless there was a change in the structure of
gurdwārā management which had been in the hands of clergy who had come into
control of the Sikh holy places since the times Sikhs had been driven by Mughal
repression to seek safety in remote hills and deserts. A kind of professional
coenobitism, contrary to the character of Sikhism, had since developed. Most of the
clergy had reverted to Brāhmaṇical ritualism rejected by the Gurūs, and had become
neglectful of their religious office. They had converted ecclesiastical assets into
private properties, and their lives were not free from the taint of licentiousness and
luxury. Even before the beginning of the Gurdwārā reform movement, sporadic
voices had been raised against this retrogression and maladministration of these
places of worship. Organized platforms to pursue reform had developed in the form
of regional Khālsā dīwāns . For example, a Khālsā Dīwān had been set up in the
Mājhā area in 1904, though it was soon afterwards merged with the Chief Khālsā
Dīwān, successor to the Lahore and Amritsar dīwāns of the earlier phase of the
Siṅgh Sabhā movement. But the Gurdwārā reform meant a confrontation with the
mahants or the installed clergy who had the support of the government, and the
Chief Khālsā Dīwān avoided, as a matter of policy, to antagonize the government.
The Mājhā Dīwān was therefore revived in 1918 as Central Mājhā Khālsā Dīwān. It
was becoming clear that the reformers would settle for nothing less than a complete
restructuring of the management of the gurdwārās and ousting of the mahants
through negotiations, legal action, or failing both, forcible eviction. All the different
strategies were pressed into service at Gurdwārā Bābe dī Ber at Siālkoṭ with
dramatic success. Srī Akāl Takht or Takht Akāl Buṅgā was vacated by the clergy
under fear of force and/or losing caste by association with the "low caste. "
With the establishment in November 1920 of Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak
Committee (q. v.), the need arose for developing a system to co-ordinate the work
of regional jathās , structured groups or bands of men and women. There were at
least ten such jathās espousing gurdwārā reform in different regions of the Punjab.
According to a contemporary press report, Master Motā Siṅgh was the first to
suggest the formation of a Gurdwārā Sevak Dal of 500 Sikh volunteers, including
100 paid whole-timers, all ready for action at the call of the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā
Parbandhak Committee. At about the same time, Jathedār Kartār Siṅgh Jhabbar,
who had liberated Gurdwārā Paňjā Sāhib, Hasan Abdāl, on 18 November 1920, had
suggested in a report from there that a jathā of 200 Siṅghs be got up to be
despatched wherever action was. These proposals were discussed at a meeting of
leading activists in front of the Akāl Takht on 14 December 1920. It was decided to
form a central dal , corps or contingent, of which Sarmukh Siṅgh Jhabāl was
designated the first jathedār (president). This date (14 December 1920) is generally
accepted to be the date of the formation of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal, although the
title Shiromaṇī was added only through a resolution passed by the Dal on 29 March
1922. A confidential memorandum (22 February 1922) of the Punjab police dealing

with the activities of the Akālī Dal and Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee
during 1920-22 does not contain this appellation for the Dal, but refers to it as the
"Central Akālī Dal" to stress its linking role for the various confederated jathās .
According to this report, "the present strength of the Akālī Dal, including the figures
for the Native States, is at least 25, 000 and may be greatly in excess of that
estimate. " In some contemporary government documents, the Dal is also referred
to as Akālī Fauj (army) which "functioned on military lines, marched in fours, wore
badges, carried flags and organised camps. "
The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal was meant to function under the overall control of the
Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee making available to it volunteers when
required. But initially the jathās tended to operate independently. Yet there was
significant closeness between the two and, at times, overlapping of leadership and
action. Amar Siṅgh Jhabāl, prominent in the Akālī hierarchy, continued to be the
head of the Gurū Rām Dās Jathā, and Tejā Siṅgh Bhuchchar, the first Jathedār of Srī
Akāl Takht, continued to head his Gaṛgajj Akālī Dal and was at the same time one of
the 5-member presidium of the Shiromaṇī Panth Milauṇī Jathā of the Central Mājhā
Khālsā Dīwān. As the Akālī movement gathered momentum, unleashing a political
storm in the Punjab with successive morchās or agitations such as those erupting
over the issue of the keys of the Golden Temple treasury, and Gurū kā Bāgh, Jaito
and at Bhāī Pherū-resulted in the complete integration of the regional jathās into the
Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal. This also brought added power and prestige to the Shiromaṇi
gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee, bequeathing to it fuller control over the Dal,
although the latter did maintain its separate identity, the two working on more or
less similar lines for the achievement of a common goal. The apex leadership of both
organizations was a common homogeneous group. The membership base of the
Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal lay primarily in the rural Punjab. Akālī leaders preached the need
and importance of gurdwārā reform in the villages or at gatherings held on religious
festivals, and exhorted Sikhs to receive the rites of Khālsā baptism and join the
ranks of the Akālī Dal to liberate their religious shrines from the control of an effete
and corrupt clergy. Volunteers of a locality formed local Akālī jathās which were
consolidated into district Akālī jathās affiliated to the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal at the
summit. The composition of the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee before
the passing of the Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925, was also analogous, and headquarters
of both organizations were located in the Golden Temple complex at Amritsar. Both
the bodies were together declared unlawful by a government order issued on 12
October 1923, and the ban on both was simultaneously lifted on 13 September
1926.
The Akālī movement ended with the enactment of the Sikh Gurdwara Act,
1925, and the lifting of the ban on the two Sikh organizations. The right of the Sikhs
to possess and manage their gurdwārās and properties attached to them had been
recognized. This right was to be exercised through a central board, subsequently
redesignated the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee, a statutory body
formed through an electoral process based on universal adult franchise of the Sikh
Panth. The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal thereafter became an independent political party
which instead of functioning under the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee
sought to control it through the electoral process. Differences among the Akālī
leaders had already cropped up on the question of implementing the Gurdwaras Act.
The Government had stipulated that only those detenues would be released from jail
who gave an undertaking in writing that they accepted and were ready to implement

the Act. While one group headed by Sardār Bahādur Mehtāb Siṅgh obtained their
release by giving the required undertaking, the other group refused to accept the
offer of a conditional release. The first election to the Central Board (Shiromaṇī
Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee) held on 18 June 1926 was fought mainly between
the Mehtāb Siṅgh group and the faction led by those who had declined to accept the
condition laid down by government and were still behind the bars. The result went
clearly in favour of the latter, who rightfully claimed to be the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal.
This faction won 85 seats against 26 by the Sardār Bahādur group, 5 by the
government sponsored Sudhār Committee and 4 by independents. Since then the
Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal's control over the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee
has been complete and continuous.
Thus gaining supremacy in Sikh affairs, the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal extended the
scope of its activity to the national arena. It fully supported the Indian National
Congress during the Bārdolī satyāgraha (agitation) and the campaign for the boycott
of the Simon Commission in 1928. But the report of the Motilāl Nehrū Committee, a
joint body representing the Indian National Congress, the Muslim League and the
Sikhs to draft a constitution for free India, came as a sore disappointment to the
Sikhs because it had defaulted in proposing any measures to protect their minority
rights. Towards the end of December 1929, the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal and its sister
organization, the Central Sikh League, convened an Akālī Conference at Lahore to
coincide with the 44th annual session of the Congress Party. Presiding over the
conference, Bābā Khaṛak Siṅgh reiterated Sikhs' determination not to let any single
community establish its political hegemony in the Punjab. The Akālī conference, and
even more dramatically the huge Sikh procession which preceded it, made a
tremendous impact. The Congress not only rejected the Nehrū Report but also
assured the Sikhs that no political arrangement which did not give them full
satisfaction would be accepted by the party.
The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal, since its victory at the first Gurdwārā elections in
1926 had functioned as a well- knit party under the leadership of Bābā Khaṛak Siṅgh
and Master Tārā Siṅgh but rifts began to show up in the wake of the next elections
which took place in 1930. Bābā Khaṛak Siṅgh not only resigned the presidentship of
the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal but also quit the party to form a rival body, the Central Akālī
Dal. Master Tārā Siṅgh secured the presidentship of the Dal and remained at the
helm of Sikh politics for the next three decades. The question of constitutional
reforms under discussion at the time prompted the two groups to sink their
differences, and act by mutual counsel. Their agreed standpoint in respect of the
Round Table Conferences and the Communal Award was based on a charter of 17
demands adopted at the annual session of the Central Sikh League held on 8 April
1931 under the presidentship of Master Tārā Siṅgh. In this charter, the Sikhs
expressed their opposition to communal representation and favoured joint
electorates, adding the rider that if it was finally decided to resort to reservation of
seats on communal basis they would demand a 30 per cent share of the assembly
seats in the Punjab and five per cent in the Central legislature. Other demands
included a one-third share in provincial services and the public service commission;
maintenance of the then existing Sikh percentage in the army; Sikh representation in
the Central cabinet and the central public service commission; recognition of Punjabi
as the official language in Punjab; and protection of Sikh minorities outside the
Punjab on a par with protection provided for other minorities. At the national level,

the Sikhs wanted the government to be secular; and the Centre to have residuary
powers including powers needed for the protection of minorities.
The dissident group of Bābā Khaṛak Siṅgh, the Central Akālī Dal, could never
supplant the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal as a representative of the Sikh mainstream, and
became extinct after Independence (1947). Even before 1947, it was the Shiromaṇī
Akālī Dal which had campaigned for Sikh rights and dignity at Ḍaskā (1931), Koṭ
Bhāī Thān Siṅgh (1935-37) and Shahīd Gañj, Lahore (1935-40).
The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal fought the first elections, under the Government of
India Act, 1935, and on the basis of Communal Award, held in Punjab on 4 January
1937, in collaboration with the Indian National Congress. Out of the 29 Sikh seats,
the Akālī Dal carried 10 seats (out of 14 contested) and the Congress won five.
Opposing them was the Khālsā National Party aligned with the Chief Khālsā Dīwān
and the Unionist Party. While the Unionist Party with 96 out of a total of 175 seats
formed the ministry, the Akālīs joined hands with the Congress to form the
Opposition. With the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939, a rift
occurred between the Congress and the Akālīs. While the former boycotted the
assemblies, the Akālīs, although they were at one with the Congress in their demand
for the declaration of war aims and the way these aims were to be applied to India,
pressed the Government for the protection of their minority interests. Their
representative, Baldev Siṅgh, joined the Unionist ministry in the Punjab as a result of
a pact made with the premier, Sir Sikandar Hayāt Khān. Although known in history
as the Sikandar-Baldev Siṅgh Pact signed on 15 June 1942, it essentially marked
rapprochement between the Unionist leader and the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal which had
spearheaded a very active campaign against his government in the Punjab.
The Pakistan Resolution passed by Indian Muslim League at Lahore in 1940,
demanding a separate country comprising Muslim majority provinces, posed a
serious threat to the Sikhs. In Pakistan as envisaged by the Muslim League, Sikhs
would be reduced to a permanent minority, hence. to a subordinate position. The
Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal opposed tooth and nail any scheme for the partition of the
country. It successively rejected the Cripps' proposal (1942), Rājā Formula (1944)
and the Cabinet Mission Plan (1946). But the existing demographic realities were
against the Sikhs. Nowhere in the Punjab did they have a sizeable tract with a Sikh
majority of population. To counter the League demand for Pakistan, the Shiromaṇī
Akālī Dal put forward the Āzād Punjab scheme proposing the carving out of the
Punjab of a new province, roughly between Delhi and the River Chenāb, where none
of the three communities-Muslims, Hindus and Sikhs-would command an absolute
majority. But the proposal did not gather sufficient support. Even the Central Akālī
Dal led by Bābā Khaṛak Siṅgh, set itself up against it. The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal, under
the prevailing circumstances cast its lot with the Indian National Congress trusting to
it the protection of Sikhs' minority rights. In a public statement made on 4 April
1946, Jawāharlāl Nehrū said, "redistribution of provincial boundaries was essential
and inevitable. I stand for semi-autonomous units as well. . . . I should like them
[the Sikhs] to have a semi-autonomous unit within the province so that they may
experience the glow of freedom. " The working committee of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal
adopted on 17 March 1948 a resolution advising its representatives in the provincial
assemblies as well as at the Centre formally to join the Congress party. Minority
grievances, however, kept accumulating. Sikh members of the East Punjab
Assembly, including a minister in the Congress government, complained of

increasing communal tension and discrimination against their community in
recruitment to government services. The major irritant was the language question.
After Independence, the Sikhs expected Punjabi, mother tongue of all Punjabis, to
replace Urdu as the official language and medium of education in schools. Even a
resolution of the Central Government published in the Gazette of India dated 14
August 1948 declaring that "the principle that a child should be instructed in the
early stage of his education through the medium of his mother tongue has been
accepted by the government" did not induce the Congress government of East
Punjab to declare Punjabi as the medium of instruction. On the contrary, the
majority Hindu community went so far as to disclaim Punjabi as their mother tongue.
At the Centre too the Constituent Assembly rescinded its own resolution of August
1947 and declared on 26 May 1949 that "statutory reservation of seats for religious
minorities should be abolished. " The leaders of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal finally
veered round to the view that, in the absence of constitutional guarantees to
safeguard rights of the minorities, the only way out for the Sikhs was to strive for an
area where they would be numerous enough to protect and develop their language
and culture. They therefore decided to press for the formation of a linguistic state
coterminous with Punjabi language. Master Tārā Siṅgh reactivated the Shiromaṇī
Akālī Dal and launched the campaign which came to be known as the Punjabi Sūbā
movement. In a signed article published in the Punjabi monthly Sant Sipāhī,
December 1949, he said that "whatever the name that might be given it, the Sikhs
wanted an area where they were free from the domination of the majority
community---an area within the Indian constitution but having internal autonomy as
did Kashmir. "
Two successive half-way measures, Sachar Formula and the Regional Formula,
devised by Congress and Sikh leaders by mutual counsel, failed to resolve the
linguistic and political issue. The Akālī leader, Master Tārā Siṅgh, once again gave
the call for a Punjabi Sūbā in October 1958. The Sikh masses responded
enthusiastically. The government once again initiated negotiations which culminated
in what is known as the Nehrū-Tārā Siṅgh Pact of April 1959. The truce did not last
long. Call for a fresh morchā issued from the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal on 22 May 1960.
The campaign meandering through many a vicissitude continued until the
emergence on 1 November 1966 of a Punjabi-speaking state. But before this
consummation was reached, the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal had been riven into two, one
section led by Master Tārā Siṅgh and the other by his lately arisen, but infinitely
stronger rival, Sant Fateh Siṅgh.
Shadow of this division and of certain unresolved issues such as the nontransfer to it of the state capital, Chaṇḍīgaṛh, certain Punjabi-speaking areas still
remaining outside of it and maldistribution of water resources, continued to bedevil
electoral politics in the new Punjab. In the first election to the state legislature in the
new Punjab (1967), the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal carried 26 seats in a house of 104, and
its leader, Gurnām Siṅgh, a retired judge of the Punjab High Court, formed on 28
March 1967 a ministry with the support of some other small groups, including Jana
Saṅgh, Communists and independents. But the ministry fell soon afterwards owing
to internal dissensions. On 26 May 1967, two Akālīs, Harcharan Siṅgh Huḍiārā and
Lachhmaṇ Siṅgh Gill sided with the Congress during voting on a no-confidence
motion against the ministry. The ministry survived the motion but Huḍiārā on the
same day announced the formation of a separate Akālī Dal. On 22 November,
Lachhmaṇ Siṅgh Gill with 19 other M. L. A. s openly rebelled against the Shiromaṇī

Akālī Dal legislative party, reducing the joint front led by Gurnām Siṅgh into a
minority. Lachhmaṇ Siṅgh Gill then formed, with the support of Congress party, a
new ministry which fell on 21 August 1968 when the Congress group withdrew its
support. The crisis led to the dissolution of the state legislature and the state was
placed under President's, i. e. Central Government, rule necessitating a mid-term
poll. The two factions of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal became one again and registered a
resounding victory at the hustings, emerging as the largest single party with 43
seats against Congress 38, Jana Saṅgh 8, Communists 5, and others 11. Gurnām
Siṅgh again formed a ministry in coalition with the Jana Saṅgh, the Communists
supporting from outside. This ministry was brought down on 25 March 1970 by
internal party dissent. A young Akālī leader, Parkāsh Siṅgh Bādal, then formed the
government (27 March 1970) supplanting Gurnām Siṅgh as Chief Minister. This Akālī
government too had a short tenure. In the fresh Punjab Assembly elections which
took place in March 1972, the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal could muster a bare 24 seats out
of a total of 117, making way for the Congress party to form its government. This
led to self-retrospection on the part of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal.
The Working Committee of the Dal at its meeting held at Anandpur Sāhib, in
the Śivālik hills on 16-17 October 1973 adopted a statement of aims and objectives.
This statement, known as the Anandpur Sāhib Resolution (q. v. ), has, since then,
been the corner-stone of Akālī politics and strategy.
The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal enjoyed another brief spell of power in the Punjab
when at the elections in the wake of Rājīv-Lauṅgovāl accord, settlement between
Rājīv Gāndhī, then Prime Minister of India, and Sant Harchand Siṅgh Lauṅgovāl, the
Akālī leader, signed on 25 July 1985, it won an overwhelming majority of seats in
the state legislature and formed its government led by Surjīt Siṅgh Barnālā. Owing
however to internal party pressures and the non-implementation by the Government
of India of the Rājīv-Lauṅgovāl accord, this ministry also proved brittle. In the crisis
which overtook the state after its dismissal by the Government of India, the
Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal gradually became split into several factions - Akālī Dal (Bādal)
led by a former chief minister of the Punjab, Parkāsh Siṅgh Badal, Akālī Dal
(Lauṅgovāl) led by Surjīt Siṅgh Barnālā, also a former chief minister of the Punjab,
and Akālī Dal (Mān), led by a new entrant into politics, Simranjīt Siṅgh Mān,
formerly, a high-ranking member of the Indian Police Service.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Dilgeer, Harjinder Siṅgh, Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal, Jalandhar, n. d.
Pratāp Siṅgh, Giānī, Gurdwārā Sudhār arthāt Akālī Lahir. Amritsar, 1975
Ashok, Shamsher Siṅgh, Paňjāb dīāṅ Lahirāṅ. Patiala. 1974
Naraiṇ Siṅgh, Akālī Morche te Jhabbar. Delhi, 1967
Tuteja, K. L. , Sikh Politics. Kurukshetra, 1984
Gulati, Kailash Chander, The Akalis: Past and Present Delhi, 1974
Nayar, Baldev Raj, Minority Politics in the Punjab. Princeton, 1966
Sahni, Ruchi Ram, Struggle for Reform in Sikh Shrines. Ed. Ganda Singh.
Amritsar, n. d.
Nijjar, B. S. , History of the Babbar Akalis. Jalandhar, 1987
Sarhadi, Ajit Singh, Punjabi Suba. Delhi, 1970
Brass, Paul, R. , Language, Religion and Politics in North India. Delhi, 1975
Mohinder Siṅgh, The Akali Movement. Delhi, 1978

13.
14.

Teja Singh, Gurdwara Reform Movement and the Sikh Awakening. Jalandhar,
1922
Nayar, Kuldip, and Khushwant Siṅgh, Tragedy of Punjab. Delhi, 1984
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AKĀLĪ MOVEMENT, variously known as Gurdwārā Reform Movement or Gurdwārā
Agitation is how Sikhs' long drawn campaign in the early twenties of the twentieth
century for the liberation of their gurdwārās or holy shrines is described. The
campaign which elicited enthusiastic support, especially, from the rural masses, took
the form of a peaceful agitation-marches, dīvāns or religious gatherings, and
demonstrations--for Sikhs to assert their right to manage their places of worship.
This led to a series of critical episodes in which their powers of suffering were
severely tested by government suppression. In the event, Akālīs, as the protesters
were known, succeeded in their object and the control of the gurdwārās was vested
through legislation in a representative committee of the Sikhs. The State, under
Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh (1780-1839), had forborne from interfering with the
management of Sikh shrines. It endowed the more prominent among them with land
grants and other gifts but let the control remain in the hands of sectaries such as
Udāsīs, or hereditary officiants, who had assumed charge of them generally since
the days when Sikhs under pressure of Mughal persecution had been forced to seek
safety in remote hills and deserts. A kind of professional coenobitism, contrary to
Sikh religious structure, had developed over the generations. Some of its sinister
aspects became apparent soon after the fall of the Sikh kingdom. Most of the clergy
had become neglectful of their religious office. They had diverted ecclesiastical
assests, including eleemosynary lands, to their own enrichment, and their lives were
not free from the taint of licentiousness and luxury. The simple form of Sikh service
had been supplanted in the shrines by extravagant ceremonial. This was repugnant
to Sikhs freshly affranchised by the preachings of the Siṅgh Sabhā. The Puritan
reaction through which they had passed led them to revolt against the retrogression
and maladministration of their holy places.
Their central shrine, the Golden Temple at Amritsar, was controlled by the
British Deputy Commissioner through a Sikh manager whom he appointed. There
were idols installed within the temple precincts. Paṇḍits and astrologers sat on the
premises plying their trade unchecked. Pilgrims from the backward classes were not
allowed inside the Harimandar before 9 o'clock in the morning. This was a travesty
of Sikhism which permitted neither caste nor image worship. Vaguely, the feeling
had been prevalent among the Sikhs since almost the advent of the British that the
administration of the Harimandar at Amritsar was far from satisfactory. The religious
ritual practised ran counter in many details to the teachings of the Gurūs. One
audible voice of protest was that of Ṭhākur Siṅgh Sandhāṅvālīā, who was a member
of the Srī Darbār Sāhib Committee in the seventies of the last century. The Khālsā
Dīwān, Lahore, at its session (6-8 April 1907), proposed that the manager of the
Golden Temple appointed by the government be removed and a committee of Sikh
chiefs appointed in his place. Likewise, the Khālsā Dīwān, Mājhā, meeting at Tarn
Tāran on 9-10 April 1907, had recorded its concern about the management of the
shrine.
On 12 October 1920, a meeting of Sikh backward castes, sponsored by
teachers and students of the Khālsā College was held in Jalliāṅvālā Bāgh at Amritsar.
The following morning some of them were taken to Harimandar, but the priests
refused to accept kāṛāhprasād they had brought as offering and to say the ardās on
their behalf. Their supporters protested. A compromise was at last reached and it
was decided that the Gurū's word be sought. The Gurū Granth Sāhib was, as is the
custom, opened at random and the first verse on the page to be read was:

nirguṇia no āpe bakhsi lai bhāī satigur kī sevā lāi
He receives into grace (even) those with-out merit,
And puts them in the path of holy service.
(GG, 638)

The Gurū's verdict was clearly in favour of those whom the pujārīs or temple
functionaries had refused to accept as full members of the community. This was a
triumph for reformist Sikhs. The kaṛāhprasād of the Mazhabī (religious, devout)
Sikhs, reformers' description of "low-caste" Sikhs, was accepted. The devotees then
marched towards Takht Akāl Buṅgā in front of the Harimandar. The priests deserted
the Takht and the visiting pilgrims appointed a representative committee of twentyfive for its management. This was the beginning of the movement for the liberation
of the gurdwārās. The Akālīs set afoot operations for retrieving their holy places
from the control of the mahants or clergy-cum-hereditary custodians. With a view to
establishing a central committee of administration, a representative assembly of
Sikhs from all walks of life was called by the new Jathedār, provost or chief, of Takht
Akāl Buṅgā on 15 November 1920. Two days before the proposed conference, the
government set up its own committee consisting of thirty-six Sikhs to manage the
Golden Temple. This committee was nominated by the Lt-Governor of the Punjab at
the instance of Mahārājā Bhūpinder Siṅgh of Paṭiālā, who had been approached by
Bhāī Jodh Siṅgh and a few of his faculty colleagues at Khālsā College, Amritsar, to
intervene between the government and the Sikhs. The Sikhs held their scheduled
meeting on 15 November and formed a committee of 175, including the thirty-six
official nominees, designating it Shiromaṇi Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee. The
first session of the Committee was held at the Akāl Takht on 12 December 1920.
Sundar Siṅgh Majīṭhīā, Harbaṅs Siṅgh of Aṭārī and Bhāī Jodh Siṅgh were elected
president, vice-president and secretary, respectively. The more radical elements
organized a semi-military corps of volunteers known as the Akālī Dal (Army of
Immortals). The Akālī Dal was to raise and train men for 'action' to take over
gurdwārā from the recalcitrant mahants. This also signalled the appearance of a
Gurmukhī newspaper, also called Akālī.
The formation of the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee and the
Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal speeded up the movement for the reformation of Sikh religious
institutions and endowments. Under pressure of Sikh opinion, backed frequently by
demonstration of strength, the mahants began yielding possession of gurdwārā
properties to elected committees and agreed to become paid granthīs, custodians of
the scripture or scripture-readers. Several gurdwārās had thus come under the
reformists' control even before the Shiromaṇī Committee and the Akālī Dal had been
established. However, the transition was not so smooth where the priests were
strongly entrenched or where the government actively helped them to resist mass
pressure. At Tarn Tāran, near Amritsar, a batch of gurdwārā functionaries attacked
an unwary delegation of reformers who had been invited to the shrine for
negotiations. One of them, Hazārā Siṅgh of Alādīnpur, a descendant of Baghel
Siṅgh, one of the misl chiefs, fell a victim to priestly violence on 20 January 1921. He
died the following day and became the first martyr in the cause of gurdwārā reform.

Another Akālī, Hukam Siṅgh of Vasāū Koṭ, succumbed to his injuries on 4 February
1921.
Nankāṇā Sāhib, the birthplace of Gurū Nānak, was the scene of violence on a
much larger scale. The custodian, Naraiṇ Dās, the wealthiest of mahants, had a
most unsavoury reputation, and his stewardship of the Nankāṇā Sāhib shrines had
started many a scandal. On the morning of 20 February 1921, as a jathā or band of
150 Akālīs came to the Gurdwārā, the private army of Naraiṇ Dās fell upon them,
raining bullets all around. The jathā leader, Bhāī Lachhmaṇ Siṅgh, of Dhārovāl, was
struck down sitting in attendance of the Gurū Granth Sāhib. Bhāī Dalīp Siṅgh, a
much respected Sikh leader who was well known to the mahant and who came to
intercede with him to stop the carnage, was killed with a shot from his pistol. Many
of the jathā fell in the indiscriminate firing by the mahant's men. The news of the
massacre caused widespread gloom. Among those who came to Nankāṇā to express
their sense of shock were Sir Edward Maclagan, the British Lt-Governor of the
Punjab. Mahātmā Gāndhī came accompanied by Muslim leaders, Shaukat 'Alī and
Muhammad 'Alī. Naraiṇ Dās and some of his accomplices were arrested and the
possession of the shrine was made over by government to a committee of seven
Sikhs headed by Harbaṅs Siṅgh of Aṭari, vice-president of the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā
Parbandhak Committee.
Another crisis arose as the Punjab Government seized on 7 November 1921 the
keys of the Golden Temple treasury. The Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak
Committee lodged a strong protest and called upon the Sikhs the world over to
convene meetings to condemn the government action. Further means of recording
resentment included a decision for Sikhs to observe a haṛṭal, i. e. to strike work, on
the day the Prince of Wales, who was coming out on a tour, landed on Indian
shores. They were also forbidden to participate in any function connected with the
Prince's visit. To fill the British jails, volunteers, draped in black and singing hymns
from Scripture, marched forth in batches. Ex-servicemen threw up their pensions
and joined Akālī ranks. Under pressure of the growing agitation, the government
gave way, and on 19 January 1922 a court official surrendered the bunch of keys,
wrapped in a piece of red cloth, to Khaṛak Siṅgh, president of the Shiromaṇī
Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee. Mahātmā Gāndhī sent a wire saying, "First
decisive battle for India's freedom won. "
Gurū kā Bāgh (Garden of the Gurū), 20 km north of Amritsar, a small shrine
commemorating Gurū Arjan's visit, witnessed a morchā most typical of the series in
the Akālī movement. On 9 August 1922, the police arrested on charges of trespass
five Sikhs who had gone to gather firewood from the Gurdwārā's land for Gurū kā
Laṅgar, the community kitchen. The following day, the arrested Sikhs were
summarily tried and sentenced to six months' rigorous imprisonment. Undeterred,
the Sikhs continued coming in batches every day to hew wood from the site and
courting arrest and prosecution. After 30 August, police adopted a sterner policy to
terrorize the volunteers. Those who came to cut firewood from Gurū kā Bāgh were
beaten up in a merciless manner until they to a man lay senseless on the ground.
The Sikhs suffered all this stoically and went day by day in larger numbers to submit
themselves to the beating. A committee appointed by the Indian National Congress
to visit Amritsar, lauded the Akālīs and censured the police for atrocities committed
by it. Rev C. F. Andrews, a Christian missionary, came on 12 September 1922, and
was deeply moved by the noble "Christ like" behaviour of the Akālī passive resisters.

At his instance, Sir Edward Maclagan, the Lt-Governor of the Punjab, arrived at Gurū
kā Bagh (13 September) and ordered the beatings to be stopped. Four days later the
police retired from the scene. By then 5, 605 Akālīs had been arrested, with 936
hospitalized. The Akālīs got possession of Gurdwārā Gurū kā Bāgh along with the
disputed land.
Gurū kā Bagh excited religious fervour to a degree unapproached during the
70 years of British rule. The judicial trials of the volunteers were followed with close
interest and, when those convicted were being removed to jails to serve their
sentences, mammoth crowds greeted them en route. On 30 October 1922, many
men and women laid themselves on the rail track at Paňjā Sāhib in an attempt to
stop a train to offer refreshments to Akālī prisoners being escorted to Naushehrā jail.
Two Sikhs, Partāp Siṅgh and Karam Siṅgh, were crushed to death before the engine
driver could pull up.
Not all Sikhs accepted the cult of non-violence to which the Shiromaṇī
Committee had committed itself. The Nankāṇā massacre and the behaviour of the
police at Gurū kā Bāgh induced some to organize an underground terrorist
movement. These terrortists, who called themselves Babar (Lion) Akālīs, were
largely drawn from the Ghadr party and army soldiers on leave. Babar violence was,
however, of short duration. By the summer of 1923, most of the Babars had been
apprehended. The trial conducted in camera began inside Lahore Central jail on 15
August 1923 and was presided over by an English judge. Of the 91 accused, two
died in Jail during trial, 34 were acquitted, six including Jathedār Kishan Siṅgh
Gaṛgajj, were awarded death penalty, while the remaining 49 were sentenced to
varying terms of imprisonment.
Another Akālī morchā was precipitated by police interrupting an akhaṇḍ pāth, i.
e. continuous recital of the Gurū Granth Sāhib, at Gurdwārā Gaṅgsar at Jaito, in the
Princely state of Nābhā, to demonstrate Sikhs' solidarity with the cause of Mahārājā
Ripudaman Siṅgh, the ruler of the state, who had been deposed, by the British.
Batches of passive resisters began arriving every day at Jaito to assert their right to
freedom of worship. The Shiromaṇī Committee and the Akālī Dal were declared
illegal bodies by government and more prominent of the leaders were arrested. They
were charged with conspiracy to wage war against the King and taken to Lahore
Fort for trial. The agitation continued and the size of the jathās going to Jaito was in
fact increased from 25 each to a hundred, and then from one hundred to five
hundred. One such jathā was fired upon on 21 February 1924 by the state police
resulting in a number of casualties.
With the arrival in May 1924 of Sir Malcolm Hailey as Governor of the Punjab,
the government began to relent. Negotiations were opened with the Akālī leaders
imprisoned in Lahore Fort. A bill accommodating their demands was moved in the
Punjab Legislative Council and passed into law in 1925, under the title the Sikh
Gurdwaras Act, 1925. As this legislation was put on the statute book, almost all
historical shrines, numbering 241 as listed in Schedule I of the Act, were declared as
Sikh gurdwārāsand they were to be under the administrative control of the Central
Board, later renamed the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee. Procedure
was also laid down in section 7 of the Act for the transfer of any other gurdwārā not
listed in Schedules I and II to the administrative control of the Central Board. With
the passage of this Act, the Akālī agitation ceased.

In the Akālī agitation for gurdwārā reform, nearly forty thousand went to jail.
Four hundred lost their lives while two thousand suffered injuries. Sums to the tune
of sixteen lakhs of rupees were paid by way of fines and forfeitures and about seven
hundred Sikh government functionaries in the villages were deprived of their
positions. In addition to this, a ban was placed on civil and military recruitment of
Sikhs which, however, was subsequently withdrawn.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

Ganda Singh, Some Confidential Papers of the Akali Movement. Amritsar,
1965
Mohinder Siṅgh, The Akali Movement. Delhi, 1978
Teja Singh, Gurdwara Reform and the Sikh Awakening. Jalandhar, 1922
Sahni, Ruchi Ram, Struggle for Reform in Sikh Shrines, Ed. Ganda Singh.
Amritsar, n. d.
Gulati, Kailash Chander, The Akalis: Past and Present. Delhi, 1974
Harbans Singh, The Heritage of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1983
Pratāp Siṅgh, Giānī, Gurdwārā Sudhār arthāt Akālī Lahir. Amritsar, 1975
Dilgeer, Harjinder Siṅgh, Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal. Jalandhar, n. d.
Josh, Sohan Siṅgh, Akālī Morchiāṅ dā Itihās. Delhi, 1972
Jagjīt Siṅgh, Siṅgh Sabhā Lahir. Ludhiana, 1974
Ashok, Shamsher Siṅgh, Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee dā
Paňjāh Sālā Itihās. Amritsar, 1982
Sardār Siṅgh Bhāṭīā

AKĀLĪ SAHĀYAK BUREAU, lit. a bureau to help (sahāyak, from Skt. sahāya, one who
lends one company or support) the Akālīs, then engaged in a bitter struggle for the
reformation of the management of their places of worship, was a small office set up
at Amritsar in 1923 by the Indian National Congress to assist the Akālīs with their
public relations work. This Akālī struggle, aiming at ousting the priestly order who
had come into control of Sikh shrines introducing therein conservative rituals and
forms of worship rejected in Sikhism, came into conflict with the British authority
who buttressed the entrenched clergy, and ran a course parallel to the Congress
movement for the nation's freedom. The Akālīs' heroic deeds of sacrifice and
disciplined suffering won them appreciation of Congress hierarchy as well as of the
people in common. When under pressure mounted by the Akālīs, the British district
magistrate of Amritsar was forced to return to the Golden Temple authorities keys of
the toshākhānā, the Temple treasury, seized from them, the Congress applauded the
incident as a victory for the nationalist cause. Mahātmā Gāndhī in fact sent a wire to
Sardār Khaṛak Siṅgh, president of the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee
which read as follows : "First decisive battle for India's freedom won congratulations
- M. K. Gandhi. "
The wholesale massacre of Akālī reformists (20 February 1921) at Nankāṇā
Sāhib, birthplace of Gurū Nānak, shook the entire nation and Congress leaders such
as Mahātmā Gāndhī, Shaukat 'Alī and Muhammad 'Alī travelled to Nankāṇā Sāhib to
pay homage to the martyrs. The patient suffering of Akālī volunteers in the Gurū kā
Bāgh campaign (1922) when they faced police brutalities calmly and stoically won
them countrywide sympathy and admiration and the British scholar and missionary,
C. F. Andrews, wrote a very touching account of the trial the Akālīs went through
day after day.
At a special meeting held on 17 September 1922, the Working Committee of
the Indian National Congress adopted a resolution condemning the police
highhandedness. It also appointed a sub-committee to conduct enquiry into the
Gurū kā Bāgh affair. When the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee and the
Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal which were directing and guiding the Akālī campaigns (morchās)
were banned by the British government in India, the Indian National Congress at a
meeting in December 1923 declared the outlawing of the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā
Parbandhak Committee and the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal as "a direct challenge to the
right of the free association of all Indians and a blow aimed at all movements for
freedom. "
The Akālī and Congress movements had thus become intervolved and both
served to feed the nationalist sentiment in the country. The Akālī Sahāyak Bureau
was designed to serve as a vehicle for publicizing Akālī activity and to serve as a link
between the Congress and the Akālīs. A. T. Giḍwānī, Principal of Gujarāt Vidyāpīṭh,
was placed in charge of the Bureau. After Giḍwānī's arrest by the British, Mr. Shuklā
of the United Provinces took over charge, but he was soon replaced by K. M.
Panikkar who had returned from Oxford with a first class degree in history-the first
Indian ever to achieve the distinction, and who had left his academic position as
head of the Department of History at Alīgaṛh Muslim University to take to politics and
journalism. Panikkar was for this position the personal choice of Mahātmā Gāndhī
who, though impressed by the successes Akālīs achieved through their adherence to
passive resistance, was not clear about their ultimate objective. This was especially
so in the case of Jaito Morchā. Panikkar sent reports which only deepened Mahātmā

Gāndhī's sense of ambivalence. Panikkar warned Gāndhī about the organization of
Akālī jathās which roamed the countryside as a strong force and which for Panikkar
were reminiscent of Sikh jathās or bands of the second half of the eighteenth
century and which were, according to him, tamed by Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh, only to
reemerge after his death. He stressed that these jathās with their military structure
and discipline and their spirit of militancy constituted a menace to other communities
in the Punjab. Having served for a while in the Sikh state of Paṭiālā and edited Sikhs'
English newspaper, The Hindustan Times, he was fairly well acquainted with the
Sikhs.
After the Sikh Gurdwaras Act was placed on the statute book in 1925, the Akālī
agitation ceased. And so the Akālī Sahāyak Bureau became redundant.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Josh, Sohan Siṅgh, Akālī Morchiāṅ dā Itihās. Delhi, 1972
Pratāp Siṅgh, Giānī, Gurdwārā Sudhār arthāt Akālī Lahir. Amritsar, 1975
Mohinder Siṅgh, The Akali Movement. Delhi, 1978
Amrik Siṅgh, ed. , Punjab in Indian Politics. Delhi, 1985
Kapur, Rajiv A. , Sikh Separatism: The Politics of Faith. London, 1986
Panikkar, K. M. , An Autobiography. Oxford (Delhi), 1979
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AKĀLĪ TE PRADESĪ, See AKĀLĪ, THE

AKĀLĪ, THE, a Punjabi daily newspaper which became the central organ of the
Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal, then engaged in a fierce struggle for the reformation of the
management of the Sikh gurdwārās and a vehicle for the expression of nationalist
political opinion in the Punjab in the wake of the massacre of Jalliāṅvālā Bāgh in
Amritsar (1919), followed by the annual session of the Indian National Congress.
The first issue of the paper was brought out from Lahore on 21 May 1920 to honour
the anniversary of the martyrdom of the Fifth Gurū of the Sikhs, Gurū Arjan. The
paper was the brain-child of Master Sundar Siṅgh of Lyallpur who had fanatically
pleaded the need for a periodical in Punjabi dedicated to the patriotic cause.
Borrowing the paltry sum of Rs. 500 from a friend, he launched the newspaper
under the masthead "Akālī". He had the support of Sardār Harchand Siṅgh of
Lyallpur, Tejā Siṅgh Samundarī, Master Tārā Siṅgh, Professor Nirañjan Siṅgh, Sardūl
Siṅgh Caveeshar and Bhāī Dalīp Siṅgh who later fell a martyr at Nankāṇā Sāhib in
the massacre of Akālī agitators in 1921. Sundar Siṅgh persuaded Giānī Hīrā Siṅgh
Dard to take over as editor of the Akālī. Three months later Maṅgal Siṅgh, a
University graduate, then serving as a tahsildār in the revenue department of the
government, resigned his post to join hands with Giānī Hīrā Siṅgh. They between
them made the Akālī very popular - Hīrā Siṅgh by his resounding patriotic verse and
Maṅgal Siṅgh by his enlightened and penetrating comment. A series of incidents
such as the Nankāṇā massacre, Gurū kā Bāgh brutality and the deposition by the
British of the Sikh ruler of the princely state of Nābhā further radicalized Sikh
opinion. The Akālī came into conflict with the government on several occasions and
suffered forfeiture and suppression. Once it had to seek asylum under a baker's roof
from where it was published clandestinely every morning. Passing through many
vicissitudes and changing its name several times, it has survived to this day. In
October 1922, it was merged with the Pradesī Khālsā, a daily run by Master Tārā
Siṅgh at Amritsar. The Pradesī Khālsā was launched with funds provided by Sikhs
settled in foreign countries, hence the name Pradesī (foreign). The Akālī merging
with this paper shifted to Amritsar and assumed the new name Akālī te Pradesī. For
a time, the Akālī was published from Amritsar in Urdu, Persian script, simultaneously
with the Akālī te Pradesī (Punjabi). The Akālī te Pradesī too went through a
succession of suspensions and prosecutions by government. Yet it kept re emerging
every time with renewed vigour and with a sharper militant message. In 1930 when
it was banned under the Press Act, it was registered under the new name, Akālī
Patrikā. It continued publication under this name from Lahore until 1939 when it
reverted to the old name Akālī. After the Partition of the Punjab in 1947, it shifted
back to Amritsar. These days it is being published from Jalandhar the under name of
Akālī Patrīkā.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Sūbā Siṅgh, Paňjābī Pattarkārī dā Itihās. Chandigarh, 1978
Nirañjan Siṅgh, Jīvan Vikās. Delhi, 1970
Harbans Singh, Aspects of Punjabi Literature. Fīrozpur, 1961
Barrier, N. Gerald, The Sikhs and Their Literature. Delhi, 1970
Sardār Siṅgh Bhāṭīā

AKĀLĪĀṄ DI CHHĀUṆĪ, also called Chhāuṇī Nihaṅgāṅ, situated outside Ghī Maṇḍī
Sherāṅvālā Gate, Amritsar, was the seat of the Sikh warrior and hero, Akālī Phūlā
Siṅgh (d. 1823). The present six-storeyed burj (tower) was built by the Nihaṅgs, a
warrior sect of the Sikhs, in the early twentieth century with public donations. The
ground floor of the tower consists of a big hall with four doors. The upper storeys
have windows opening on all sides. The dome at the top is built of concrete. The
central hall has a marble floor. A small shrine dedicated to Gurū Hargobind stands in
the precincts of the Chhāuṇī. It commemorates the akhāṛā (wrestling pit) where
Sikhs in the time of Gurū Hargobind practised physical feats. Adjoining the shrine is
an old well said to have been got dug by Gurū Hargobind.
Gurnek Siṅgh

AKĀL-PURAKH stands in Sikh religious literature for the Divine Being, i. e. God. Like
Akāl, Mūrati, it is composed of two units, viz. akāl (non-temporal) and purakh
(person). The latter figures in Mūl-Mantra, the preamble to Gurū Nānak's Japu, in
conjunction with Kartā (Creator), the whole expression implying the Creator Divine
Person. In the Sikh tradition, the expression Akāl-Purakh has gained common
currency like the terms Vāhigurū and Satinām, equivalently used
Purakh' as a linguistic symbol derives from the Sanskrit puruṣa (man),
invariably employed in the masculine gender. In the Vedic literature, the term also
stands for the world, indicating the entirety of universal existence. In the Indian
systems of Sāṅkhya and Yoga, Puruṣa, as one of the two cardinal metaphysical
principles, stands for spirituality or simply consciousness, which exerts influence on
Prakriti (Nature) that is physical in its make-up. The core of puruṣa, therefore, is
consciousness, denoted by chit in the Sat-Chit-Anand conception of the Absolute.
This connotation of the term invests 'Purakh' with spirituality, signifying the Divine
Person. In conjunction with akāl, the expression as a whole means the Everlasting
Divine Person (God), in the Sikh tradition and literature.
'Akāl Purakhu' as a single composite term appears only once in the Gurū
Granth Sāhib (GG, 1038). We also come across the term in Gurū Rām Dās, GauṛīPūrabī, Karhale (GG, 235), but in the inverse form as Purakhu-Akāli. However, the
Dasam Granth compositions of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh often employ Akāl-Purakh as a
substitute for God, the Eternal Being. Akāl being a cardinal and central concept in
Sikhism, its use alongside of Purakh, accords it a distinct theological status.

See AKĀL
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Talib, Gurbachan Singh, Japuji : The Immortal Prayer-chant. Delhi, 1997
Trilochan Siṅgh, “Theological Concepts of Sikhism" in Sikhism. Patiala, 1969
Sher Singh, The Philosophy of Sikhism. Lahore, 1944
Nripinder Singh, The Sikh Moral Tradition. Delhi, 1990
Jodh Siṅgh, Bhāī, Gurmati Nirṇaya. Ludhiana, 1932
Tārā Siṅgh Narotam, Vāhigurū Sabdārth. Patiala, 1862
Sādhū Siṅgh, Gurū Sikhyā Prabhākar. Lucknow, 1893
Wazir Siṅgh

ĀKAṚ, a village in the interior of Paṭiālā district, possesses a historical shrine called
Gurdwārā Nim Sāhib. The Gurdwārā commemorates the visit of Gurū Tegh Bahādur
who, during one of his journeys through the Mālvā territory, put up here near a nim
(margosa) tree, which still exists. The leaves of one of the boughs of this tree which
leans over the shrine are tasteless while those on the rest of the tree possess their
natural bitter taste. The miracle is attributed to Gurū Tegh Bahādur, who is said to
have pulled off a twig from this branch and used it to cleanse his teeth. The oneroom Mañjī Sāhib was replaced in 1924 by a larger building. The present complex,
completed in 1972, consists of a spacious hall, with a verandah in front. The
sanctum marking the original site of the Mañjī Sāhib is in the middle of this hall with
a domed room over it on the first floor. The shrine is managed by a local committee.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Ṭhākar Siṅgh, Giānī, Srī Gurduāre Darshan. Amritsar, 1923
Tārā Siṅgh, Srī Gur Tīrath Saṅgrahi. Amritsar, n. d.
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AKBAR, JALĀL UD-DĪN MUHAMMAD (1542-1605), third in the line of Mughal
emperors of India, was born on 23 November 1542 at Amarkoṭ, in Sindh, while his
father, Humāyūṅ, was escaping to Persia after he had been ousted by Sher Khān
Sūr. Akbar was crowned king at Kalānaur, in the Punjab, on 14 February 1556. At
that time, the only territory he claimed was a small part of the Punjab, Delhi and
Āgrā having been taken by Hemū. He was then fourteen years old, but he proved
himself a great general and conqueror. Upon his death in 1605, he left to his son
and successor, Jahāṅgīr, a stable kingdom comprising the whole of Upper India,
Kābul, Kashmīr, Bihār, Bengal, Oṛīssā and a great part of the Deccan.
Great soldier as he was, it is as an administrator that he gained the highest
fame. His revenue reforms and his liberal religious policy won him popular acclaim.
He abolished jizyah, capitation tax on non- Muslims, and the pilgrimage tax Hindus
had to pay. He curbed the power of the 'ulamā. Although illiterate himself, he was
genuinely interested in the study of comparative religion and built an 'ibādat-khānā
(house of worship) where learned men of all religions assembled to discourse on
theological issues. These discussions convinced Akbar that there were good and
positive elements in all religions and prompted him to promulgate a new eclectic
faith called Dīn-i-Ilāhī (Divine Faith), which he vainly hoped would prove acceptable
to all of his subjects.
The Sikh chronicles refer to Akbar's amicable relations with Gurū Amar Dās,
Nānak III. They also allude to Akbar's visit to Goindvāl where he had to eat in the
Sikh community refectory like any other pilgrim before he could see the Gurū. As the
Mahimā Prakāsh records, the Emperor refused to step on the silks spread out for
him by his servants when going to call on Gurū Amar Dās. He turned aside the lining
with his own hands and walked to the Gurū's place barefoot. As recorded in Abul
Fazl's, Akbar- nāmā, a contemporary source, Akbar also visited Gurū Arjan at
Goindvāl on 24 November 1598. At the Gurū's instance, he remitted the annual
revenue of the peasants of the district, who had been hit hard by the failure of the
monsoon. According to another account, complaints were made to Akbar that the
Holy Book of the Sikhs, Granth Sāhib, contained references derogatory to Islam and
other religions. Akbar, who was then encamped at Baṭālā in the Punjab, sent for
Gurū Arjan. The Gurū despatched Bhāī Buḍḍhā and Bhāī Gurdās with the Holy
Volume. The book was opened at random and read from a spot pointed out by
Akbar. The hymn was in praise of God. So were the others read out subsequently.
Akbar was highly pleased and made an offering of fifty-one gold mohars to the
Granth Sāhib. He presented Bhāī Buḍḍhā and Bhāī Gurdās with robes of honour and
gave a third one for the Gurū.
Akbar died at Āgrā on 16 October 1605 and was succeeded by his son,
Jahāṅgīr.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Bhallā, Sarūp Dās, Mahimā Prakāsh, Part II . Patiala, 1971
Smith, Vincent A. , Akbar. Delhi, 1962
Beveridge, A. H. , trans. , The Akbar Nama. Delhi, 1989
Macauliffe, Max Arthur, The Sikh Religion. Oxford, 1909
Srī Rām Sharma

AKBAR KHĀN, MUHAMMAD (d. 1848), son of Dost Muhammad Khān, the ruler of
Afghanistan. He was a fiery young man of great dash and daring. Like his father, he
was keen to regain the Afghān possessions in India - Multān, Kashmīr, Attock and
Peshāwar. In 1837, Dost Muhammad Khān declared a holy war against the Sikhs
and attacked the fortress of Jamrūd at the entrance to the Khaibar Pass. An attack
led by Akbar Khān was repulsed, though the valiant Sikh general, Harī Siṅgh Nalvā,
was killed in the action. After the assassination of Mahārājā Sher Siṅgh in September
1843, Akbar Khān's ambition to recover Peshāwar was revived. Early in 1844 he set
up his camp at Jalālābād and began to make preparations for an attack on
Peshāwar, but failed to take possession of the city. He died in 1848.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Sūrī, Sohan Lāl, 'Umdāt-ut-Twārīkh. Lahore, 1885-89.
Gupta, Hari Ram, Panjab on the Eve of First Sikh War. Chandigarh, 1975
Hasrat, Bikrama Jit, Life and Times of Ranjit Siṅgh. Hoshiarpur, 1977
Sardār Siṅgh Bhāṭīā

AKBARPUR KHUḌĀL, village 6 km northeast of Bareṭā (29º-52'N, 75º-42'E), in Mānsā
district of the Punjab, is sacred to Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, who came here in November
1706 to rescue a Sikh from captivity. According to Giānī Giān Siṅgh, Twārīkh Gurū
Khālsā, Gulāb Siṅgh, a goldsmith of Akbarpur Khuḍāl, had been imprisoned by the
village chief in a basement of his house on a false charge. The news of the Sikh in
distress reached Gurū Gobind Siṅgh while he was at Sirsā, 80 km away, as the crow
flies, already on his way to the South. But he turned his footsteps immediately with
five of his Sikhs and, reaching Khuḍāl by a forced march, rescued Gulāb Siṅgh and
instructed the chief, Nabī Bakhsh, in the path of virtue and justice. Gurū Gobind
Siṅgh then returned to Sirsā. A gurdwārā was later established outside the village.
The Mahārājā of Paṭiālā endowed it with 50 acres of land. The house of the chief
inside the village was acquired after Independence, and Gurdwārā Bhorā Sāhib
Pātshāhī 10 was constructed on the site in February 1951 by a Sikh landlord of the
area, Harchand Siṅgh Jejī, who also made an endowment. The Gurdwārā, handed
over to the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee in 1977, has a domed
sanctum, within a hall, on the first floor. The bhorā or underground cell, in which
Gulāb Siṅgh is believed to have been kept, is a small square cellar in the basement.
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AKHAṆḌ PĀṬH (akhaṇḍ = uninterrupted, without break; pāṭh = reading) is nonstop, continuous recital of the Gurū Granth Sāhib from beginning to end. Such a
recital must be completed within 48 hours. The entire Holy Volume, 1430 large
pages, is read through in a continuous ceremony. This reading must go on day and
night, without a moment's intermission. The relay of reciters who take turns at
saying Scripture must ensure that no break occurs. As they change places at given
intervals, one picks the line from his predecessor's lips and continues. When and
how the custom of reciting the canon in its entirety in one continuous service began
is not known. Conjecture traces it to the turbulent days of the eighteenth century
when persecution had scattered the Sikhs to far-off places. In those exilic, uncertain
times, the practice of accomplishing a reading of the Holy Book by a continuous
recital is believed to have originated.
Important days on the Sikh calendar are marked by akhaṇḍ pāṭhs in
gurdwārās. Celebrations and ceremonies in Sikh families centre upon akhaṇḍ pāṭhs.
The homes are filled with holiness for those two days and nights as the Gurū Granth
Sāhib, installed with ceremony in a room, especially cleaned out for the occasion, is
being recited. Apart from lending the air sanctity, such readings make available to
listeners the entire text. The listeners come as they wish and depart at their will.
Thus they keep picking up snatches of the baṇī from different portions at different
times. Without such ceremonial recitals, the Gurū Granth Sāhib, large in volume,
would remain generally inaccessible to the laity except for bāṇīs which are recited by
the Sikhs as part of their daily devotions. In bereavement, families derive comfort
from these pāṭhs. Obsequies in fact conclude with a completed reading of the Gurū
Granth Sāhib. At such pāṭhs, the Holy Book is generally recited or intoned, not
merely read. This brings out tellingly the poetic quality of the bāṇī and its power to
move or grip the listener. But it must be listened to in silence, sitting on the floor in
front of the Holy Book in a reverent posture. The start of the akhaṇḍ pāth is
preceded by a short service at which holy hymns may be recited, followed by an
ardāsoffered for the successful conclusion of thepāṭhand distribution of
kaṛāhprasādor Sikh sacarment. A similar service marks the conclusion. Ardās and
kaṛāhprasād are also offered as the reading reaches midway.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Harbaṅs Siṅgh, Berkeley Lectures on Sikhism. Delhi, 1983
Sikh Rahit Maryādā. Amritsar, 1975
Tāran Siṅgh

AKHĀṚĀ, from Sanskrit akṣpālā or akṣvālā meaning stage or theatre or arena, is in
common use a sectarian monastery, seminary or seat of Hindu anchorites such as
Sannyāsīs and Bairāgīs and Sikh ascetics, Udāsīs and Nirmalās. Located at prominent
places of pilgrimage, they provide facilities for board and lodging to inmates as well
as to travellers. They also serve as centres of study and training for neophytes.
Whereas Sannyāsī and Bairāgī akhāṛās had existed at various places since ancient
times, it was Mahant Prītam Dās Nirbān (1753-1831), an Udāsī saint, who first
conceived the idea of establishing separate akhāṛās for Udāsīs. During his travels in
South India, he persuaded Nānak Chand, uncle of Dīwān Chandū Lāl of Hyderābād
state, to make a donation of money for this purpose. This led to the setting up of
the Pañchāitī Central Akhāṛā of Udāsīs in 1779 at Prayāg (Allāhābād), with branches
at several other pilgrimage centres. Two years later, Mahant Prītam Dās founded
Nirbān Akhāṛā, popularly called Saṅgalvālā Akhāṛā, at Amritsar, of which he himself
was the head. Some other Udāsī saints also set up their own akhāṛās around the
Darbār Sāhib complex at Amritsar. Many of them were taken over by the Shiromaṇī
Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee as the agitation for Gurdwārā reform got under
way during the 1920's. The latest one was Brahm Būṭā Akhāṛā acquired towards the
end of the 1980's. Saṅgat Sāhib (Bhāī Pherū) branch of Udāsī Sikhs had established
a separate central institution at Kankhal, near Haridvār, in 1839. It was named Srī
Guru Nayā Akhāṛā Udāsīṅ, but is popularly known as Udāsīāṅ dā Chhoṭā Akhāṛā.
Nirmalā Sikhs also established their own central akhāṛā in 1862 at Paṭiālā with
funds provided by the rulers of Phūlkīāṅ states of Paṭiālā, Nābhā and Jīnd (See
NIRMAL PAÑCHĀITĪ AKHĀṚĀ). Named Dharam Dhujā Akhāṛā Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, it
is still in existence with branches at several towns throughout north India including
those at Haridvār, Kankhal, Allāhābād, Ujjain, Nāsik and Kurukshetra. The central
(Pañchāitī) Akhāṛā of Nirmalā Sikhs is now located at Kankhal.
Mohinder Siṅgh Gill

AKHBĀR DARBĀR LAHORE, an unpublisḥed collection of 92 letters, reports, notes

and summaries of events connected with the second Anglo-Sikh war, 1848-49. The
manuscript, in Persian, is preserved in Dr Gaṇḍā Siṅgh Collection at Punjabi
University, Paṭiālā. The entire manuscript comprises 382 pages. These documents
are communications written by or summaries of those received or procured by
newswriters employed by the British and stationed at Lahore. The earliest of these is
dated 23 August 1848 and the last 25 January 1849. A number of them are undated,
too, but they relate to this very period. Several of those initiating from Lahore are by
"Lālā Harsaran Dās, Akhbārnawīs, Darbār Lahore. " Other places from which these
papers originated include Multān, Fīrozpur, Bahāwalpur and Rāmnagar. A 4- page
"Persian translation of a letter in English" gives an eye-witness account of the battle
fought at Rāmnagar on 22 November 1848.
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AKHBĀR LUDHIĀṆĀ, a weekly newspaper in Persian sponsored by the British North

West Frontier Agency at Ludhiāṇā in November 1834. The paper, a four-page sheet
initially, but doubling its size within two years, started printing at the American
Missionary Press, Ludhiāṇā, shifting to the Pashauri Mall Press, Ludhiānā, in June
1841. Three years later it ceased publication. It had a small circulation mainly
determined by the requirements of the East India Company's government. The name
of the editor or subscription rates were nowhere mentioned.

The Akhbār carried news furnished by English newsprinters from various parts
of the Punjab. The main focus was Lahore, the Sikh capital, and news from Lahore
was for several years the front-page caption in the paper, the day-to-day
happenings at the court of Raṇjīt Siṅgh, the royal decrees to civil and military
officers and visits of the vakīls or representatives of independent and feudatory
states constituting the staple news taking up nearly half the space. Interesting
incidental information is thus provided concerning the character of the Mahārājā and
his administration such as his generous treatment of his soldiers (the paper in its
issue No. 99, 19 November 1836, records how, on Suchet Siṅgh Ḍogrā's report that
a platoon had returned after arduous duty in Bannū, the Mahārājā immediately
sanctioned two months' leave of absence for them to visit their families), the
severity with which he dealt with the law-breakers and miscreants (issue No. 114, 4
March 1837, records the decree issued by the Mahārājā for taking severe action
against the Afrīdī zamīndārs for their unlawful activities), the hospitality shown by his
government to foreign travellers and dignitaries (No. 106, 7 January 1837), and the
realization of revenue from the turbulent tribes of trans-Indus region (No. 115, 19
December 1836). There are references to the condition of the peasantry, law and
order situation, mode of collection of revenue, celebration of festival occasions, and
to the feudal demesnes of the Sikh nobility resumable after the death of the
occupant or sometimes even before (No. 109, 3 December 1836).
Besides news of the Lahore Darbār, the Akhbār reported an occasional item
from Ludhiāṇā, though nothing about the activities of the English political agencies
at Ludhiāṇā or Ambālā. In fact, it shunned all news relating to the East India
Company and published only such reports as had nothing to do with the policy of the
British in India. News about disputes and disturbances in Mahārājā Raṇjīt Singh
territories, about court intrigues, murders of princes and sardārs and of the power of
the Sikh army after the Mahārājā's death, received prominent display. At times
important happenings at far-off places such as Calcutta, Leh, Hyderābād, Multān,
Bahāwalpur, Balūchistān, Qandahār, Bukhārā and Khaibar, were also reported. News
of local as well as of general public interest was featured sometimes; for instance,
the opening of an English-medium school at Ludhiāṇā in 1834 (No. 111, 11 February
1837), and habs-i-dam (control of breath) performed by a sādhū, named Dharam
Dās, by remaining alive for 40 days buried underground (No. 112, 11 February
1837).
The style of writing, unlike that of the Persian chronicles generally, was exempt
from verbosity. The language used was simple and easily intelligible. The editor
apparently had a good command of Persian and he made the maximum use of the
space by his economy and precision of phrase. He dispensed with the elaborate
forms of honorifics usually surrounding the names of chiefs and grandees.
Bhagat Siṅgh

AKHBĀRĀT-I-ḌẸOṚHĪ-I-MAHĀRĀJĀ RAṆJĪT SIṄGH BAHĀDUR, a Persian manuscript
written in nasta' līq, mixed with shikastā, preserved in the National Archives of India
at New Delhi. This is a copy of the roznāmachā, i. e. a day-to-day account, of the

proceedings of the court of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh covering the period from January
to December 1825. Written in black ink on Siālkoṭ paper, it comprises 677 folios. The
name of the author/copyist does not figure anywhere in the manuscript.

To refer to the contents: Nazrānā is collected at Amritsar (fol. l ). Allard, the
Frenchman, collects Rs 40, 000 from ta'alluqā Mansovāl and is ordered by Mahārājā
Raṇjīt Siṅgh to retain the amount as amānat (fol. 1). Shortage of grass at Amritsar
(fol. 250). Bullocks of the topkhānā (arsenal) arrive at Amritsar from Lahore and are
sent to Haryāṇā Bhūmākā for grazing (fol. 1). Madsūdan Paṇḍit will procure articles
to be given in charity on the amāvas (the last day of the dark half of the lunar
month) day (fol. 1). A harkārā sent by the newswriters of Shāhjahānābād (Delhi)
comes with news from that part. The harkārā is paid Rs. 10 as in'ām (fol. 1). The
qanūngos of ta'alluqā Mansovāl present Rs. 30, 000 to the Mahārājā and are paid
Rs. 200 by way of expense (fol. 1). Letters are issued to the kārdārs of Nūrpur,
Paṭhankoṭ, Sujānpur and Hājīpur to come with their account books (fol. 1). A
harkārā brings an 'arzī from Nawāb Shāh Nawāz Khān of Mankerā touching on
events in that part. Rs 20 paid to the harkarā (fol. 1). Bābā Malak Dās and Mīhāṅ
Siṅgh, the Nānakputras, request for the lease of ta'alluqā Mansovāl. They are told
that Mansovāl will be farmed out to them after Barkhāni Khān kārdār has cleared his
accounts (fols. 1-2). Hakīm Imām ud-Dīn, qil'ādār of Gobindgaṛh, is directed to sell
the old grain and buy new instead (fol. 2). Shiv Dayāl, grandson of the late
Rāmānand Sāhū, is summoned and asked to disclose the entire assets, in cash and
kind, of Harsukh Dās (fol. 2). Chet Siṅgh, thāṇedār of qilā Jalandhar reports that the
fort is in a dilapidated condition. He is ordered to execute necessary repairs after
getting some money from Chaṛhat Siṅgh, kārdār of the place (fol. 2). The Mahārājā
weighs himself against ghī, shakarātari, til, māsh on the amāvas day and gives these
and Rs 2, 000 in cash, two pairs of gold bracelets, two cows and several robes to the
Brāhmaṇs in charity. Afterwards, the Mahārājā makes an offering of Rs 5, 000 and a
tray of sacrament (patāshe) to the Gurū Granth Sāhib at the Harimandar at Amritsar
(fol. 2). Nau Nihāl Siṅgh, son of Khaṛak Siṅgh is summoned and seated in the lap by
the Mahārājā. The Mahārājā talks to him for a while in a kind and sweet tone and
gives him a pair of gold bracelets (fol. 3). The Mahārājā pays Rs. 100 to the
chobedār who leaves for Peshāwar to escort William Moorcroft to Lahore (fol. 4).
The Mahārājā holds court at the Rām Bāgh bārādarī in Amritsar when officers such
as Hakīm 'Azīz ud-dīn, Imām ud-dīn, Bhavānī Dās, Munshī Shiv Dayāl, Sarb Dayāl,
Sardhā Rām, Dīwān Motī Rām, Sukh Dayāl, Jīvan Mall, Misr Dīvān Chand, Budh
Siṅgh Sandhāṅvālīā, and Khushāl Siṅgh Jamādār are present (fol. 5). A courtier
informs the Mahārājā about the intentions of the British government to lead
expeditions against the rulers of Pegu (in Burma) and Assam to subdue them (fol.
5). The Mahārājā sends a shuqqā, or a royal order, to Bāj Siṅgh, nāzim of Multān, to
maintain friendly relations with the local people and send the Bhaṅgī top (cannon) to
him (fol. 6). Dharam Chand, a confidant of Nau Nihāl Siṅgh, son of Khaṛak Siṅgh,
informs the Mahārājā that the sālgirah (birth anniversary) of the Sarkār's (Raṇjīt
Siṅgh) grandson falls the next day (22 February 1825) and says that it will be
appropriate for him to participate in the celebration. The Mahārājā expresses his
inability to join owing to certain reasons and pays Rs 1, 100 to meet the expenses
(fol. 6). Sardār Himmat Siṅgh states that a slip in Gurmukhī relating to the release of
Sardārnī Sadā Kaur was placed before the Gurū Granth Sāhib in the Harimandar at

Amritsar. Nothing is known about the outcome. The Mahārājā replies that there was
an indication that she should not be released (fol. 6). The Mahārājā crosses the Rāvī
in the company of 150 riders and amuses himself with hunting. Mīāṅ Dhiān Siṅgh
hunts two deer and three hogs. The Mahārājā hunts several hogs, deer and hare
(fol. 7). A pair of harkārās brings news about Peshāwar. They are paid Rs. 20 (fol.
9). The Mahārājā listens to songs and music of the dancing girls who are paid Rs 1,
000 for dresses (fol. 11). Gulāb Siṅgh Kabbā tells the Mahārājā that horsemen under
him have requested for Holī payments. They are paid Rs. 100 for wine, Rs. 300 for
payment to the dancing girls and Rs. 50 for sweets (fol. 16). The lāṅgarīs (cooks) of
the camp report famine of fuel and state that fuel is not available in Lahore at the
rate of even one rupee per maund (fol. 16). The courtiers are provided with gold
syringes. The trays of gulāl are asked for. Gulāl is thrown on the courtiers (fol. 16).
Hakīm 'Azīz ud-Dīn informs the Mahārājā that 'Imām ud-Dīn, qil'ādar-i-Gobindgaṛh,
has bought 500 maunds of sikkā (lead) from Amritsar. The Mahārājā orders for the
purchase of 2, 000 maunds of sikkā more for manufacturing cannons (fol. 23). Bābū
Bāj Siṅgh qil'ādār of Multān, offers 3 horses, 2 dromedaries and 2 ashrafīs and tells
the Mahārājā that Jawāhar Mall, kārdār of Multān, had killed an innocent zamīndār
and that such a person should not be appointed sūbahdār of any province. The
Mahārājā on hearing it sends a parwānā with a Khill'at and a pair of gold bracelets to
Hazārī Madan Siṅgh appointing him sūbahdār of Multān, instructing him to rule with
justice (fols. 23-24). Misr Belī Rām tells the Mahārājā that Misr Ralīā Rām and
Narsiṅgh Dās had been in his confinement for the last two or three days and asks
what he should do further. The Mahārājā asks him to collect the arrears of revenue
from them and the acceptance of the lease for the next year (fol. 489). The
Mahārājā goes for a morning walk (fol. 489). The qil'ādār of Hājīpur presents a nazr
of two rupees and requests payment of salary to troops under him (fol. 489). A sum
of Rs 2, 000 is sent to Srī Javālāmukhī on account of pūjā (fol. 489). A letter is sent
to Nawāb Sādiq Muhammad Khān of Bahāwalpur, with instructions to transmit all the
arrears of revenue as early as possible failing which an army would be sent against
him (fol. 489). Kauṛā Mall Sāhū is sent for and pashmīnā worth Rs 10, 000 is sold to
him (fol. 489). shuqqāis addressed to Hazārī Madan Siṅgh, sūbahdār of Multān, with
directions to execute repairs of the fort there (fol. 489). An ' arzī, along with two
bahaṅgīs of apples sent by Chūnī Lāl, nāzim of Kashmīr, is presented to the
Mahārājā who gives Rs. 10 to the bearers of the bahaṅgīs by way of in'ām and
sends a khill'at of seven pieces and a pair of gold bracelets for the nāzim (fol. 490).
Rām Ratan Sāhū of Qasbā Jalandhar is summoned by the Mahārājā who fixes upon
him the lease money of one lakh and five thousand rupees per year in respect of
Jalandhar and honours him with a turban and dopaṭṭā-i-banārasī on the occasion
(fol. 490). The zamīndārs of Koṭ Kamālīā present one rupee each to the Mahārājā
and then apprise him of the atrocities perpetrated on the subjects by the 'āmil of the
said place. The Mahārājā offers to them the lease of the qasbā but they express
their inability to accept it (fol. 491). A parwānā is sent to the Rājā of Chambā to
send two bahaṅgīs of preserves of green myrobalan to the Mahārājā (fol. 492). A
letter is received from Sardār Fateh Siṅgh Āhlūvālīā to the effect that fever has
broken out at Kapūrthalā (fol. 492). Kidār Nāth, a jeweller of Shāhjahānabād sells
two bracelets made of emeralds to the Mahārājā for Rs. 5, 000 (fol. 492). The vakīl
of Sardārnī Sadā Kaur communicates her message to the Mahārājā saying, "I have
grown old in the jail I am assigned to by the Mahārājā. I am ready to hand over the
entire property to the Mahārājā. I request to be set free so that I may pass the
remaining days of my life in worship and prayer to God. " The Mahārājā gives no
reply (fol. 493). The Mahārājā distributes fifty rupees among the Akālīs (fol. 484).

Sundar Siṅgh Daroghā-i-'Adālat is adjured by the Mahārājā to do justice and refrain
from acts of high-handedness (fol. 586). Qāzī Badr ud-Dīn, vakīl of Sardār Yār
Muhammad Khān, informs the Mahārājā about the death of William Moorcroft (fol.
593). Dīwān Motī Rām reports high prices of grain in Mankerā (fol. 616). Ganesh
Datt, kochwān, is ordered to have a new bugghī made. He tells the Mahārājā that a
bugghi could not be made locally; it could be had from Calcutta (fol. 616).
Jatī Rām Gupta

AKHBĀRĀT-I-SIṄGHĀṄ, also known as Twārīkh-i-Sikkhāṅ, is a diary of the day-to-

day events of the period from 1895 Bk/AD 1839 to 1903 Bk/AD 1847, based on
official reports which General Avitabile (q. v. ), military governor of Peshāwar during
Sikh times, received from various districts under his jurisdiction. It is written in
Khatt-i-Shikastā, also called Khatt-i-Dīwānī the name of the compiler is not known.
The only known manuscript is available, in three volumes, at the Paňjāb University
Library, Lahore, under MS. No. PE III, 30.
Volume I, comprising 250 folios, covers the period from 12 Chet 1895 Bk to 3
Jeṭh, 1896/23 March 1839- May 1839 and contains news from Peshāwar. It starts
with a meeting at Peshāwar between General Avitabile and Colonel Wade, the British
political agent on the Anglo-Sikh frontier. Details of the effusive welcome given the
latter are recorded, but nothing of what transpired between the two: There is also a
report on the meeting between Colonel Wade and General Ventura (q. v. ) on 10
Baisākh 1896 Bk/21 April 1839. In the month of Baisākh Samvat 1896, Prince Nau
Nihāl Siṅgh visited Peshāwar where special arrangements were made for his stay.
Every morning after listening to pāṭh (reading of texts) from the Gurū Granth Sāhib,
the prince held his darbār. Details are given of the income from revenue deposited in
the treasury by the local landlords; also, of the expenditure of the army. It is
recorded that the Sikh army officers stationed at Peshāwar were fully aware of the
political situation in Afghanistan and that the Lahore Darbār received through them
regular reports on the events in that country. Another report tells of Prince Nau Nihāl
Siṅgh's visit to Peshāwar in Baisākh 1896/April-May 1839. The Prince held a darbār
at which he gave audience to the Peshāwar Bārakzaīs-Pīr Muhammad Khān and
Sultān Muhammad Khān. Those in attendance on the prince included Atar Siṅgh
Sandhāṅvālīā, General Ventura, Lahiṇā Siṅgh Majīṭhīā, Fateh Siṅgh and Shaikh
Ghulām Mohi ud-Dīn. The Prince fell ill at Peshāwar and was treated by Hakīm Aizād
Bakhsh. Volume II, comprising 226 folios, covers the period from 2 Bhādoṅ 1898 Bk
to 29 Māgh 1898 Bk/15 August 1841--9 February 1842. It describes in general
activities of Avitabile on the north-west frontier. It begins with the General holding a
darbār or court at which kārdārs, i. e. revenue officials and heads of the various
departments, present reports of the conditions prevailing in the areas under their
jurisdiction. The General checked the record of the income from revenue and the
expenditure on the army. Reports from Bannū and Kohāṭ were presented and
instructions by the General were issued on the spot. He was also informed that on
his way from Peshāwar to Kohāṭ, Dr James, another of the European employees of
Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh, was robbed by the Afrīdīs. Volume III, comprising 192 folios
and covering the period from 16 Bhādoṅ 1903 Bk to 8 Phāgun 1903 Bk/29 August
1846---17 February 1847, contains reports from Bannū, Ḍerā Ismā'īl Khān, Īsā Khel,
Mūsā Khel, Kulāchī and Ṭoṅk. The principal character of this volume is Dīwān Daulat
Rām, who regularly held court and conducted official business. News on trade and
commerce is also given. The author relies for his news on official reports which the
military governor of Peshāwar received from various districts and this makes the
work authentic and reliable. Though the style resembles that of 'Umdāt-ut-Twārīkh,
the author is definitely a different person.
Mohammad Aslam

AKHBĀR-I-DARBĀR-I-MAHĀRĀJĀ RAṆJĪT SIṄGH, also called Akhbār-i-Ḍeoṛhi Sardār

Raṇjīt Siṅgh Bahādur, is a set of Persian manuscripts comprising 193 loose sheets of
unequal size. and containing, as the title indicates, news of the court of Mahārājā
Raṇjīt Siṅgh (1780-1839). These sheets are believed to be newsletters sent from the
Punjab for the Peshwā Daftar at Poonā (now Puṇe). The collection was first
discovered in 1932-33 by Dr Muhammad Nāzim, an officer of the Archaeological
Survey of India, in the Alienation Branch of the Divisional Commissioner's office at
Poonā. The material was translated into English and published by Punjab
Government Records Office in 1935 as Monograph No. 17, Events at the Court of
Raṇjīt Siṅgh 1810-1817. The Languages Department, Punjab, brought out a reprint
in 1970. Some of the original manuscripts are preserved in the Punjab State Archives
at Paṭiālā under catalogue Nos. M-412 (I, II), M-419 (I, II) and M-352 (I, II). The
newsletters, covering the period from 1 November 1810 to 2 September 1817 with
one letter, dated 10 June 1822, are written in Persian shikastā or running hand.
Each letter has a heading giving the title (usually, Akhbār-i-Ḍeoṛhi Sardār Raṇjīt
Siṅgh Bahādur) , the day of the week, the date in Hijrī era, and the place from which
the letter was sent. The newswriter remains anonymous. He also remains
impersonal in that he relates bare facts without comment or opinion. Most of the
letters were written from the Fort of Lahore where the Mahārājā held his court,
while there are some written from widely disparate places such as Fort of
Gobindgaṛh (Amritsar), Gujrāt, Aṭṭock, Wazīrābād, Rājaurī, Siālkoṭ, Fatehgaṛh and
Rāwalpiṇḍī. Ten letters relating to the period 1810-12 end with the sentence,
"Zabānī Khush-hāl Siṅgh Khabardār nawishtah shud--- this has been written on the
basis of verbal information supplied by Khushāl Siṅgh, the informant, " while three
letters of the year 1817 end with the word, arzī followed by a seal which reads
"'Azīm Ullah 1236 A. H. " The latter remains unidentified, but the former has been
conjectured to be Khushāl Siṅgh Jamādār, the ḍeoṛhīḍār, or chamberlain, under
Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh.
These letters, rich in variety and detail, provide intimate glimpses into the life
of Raṇjīt Siṅgh, his daily routine, personal habits, character and pastimes. To refer
to the newsletter, dated 9 June 1813, the Mahārājā rose early in the morning and
came to the dīwān khānā, where the sardārs presented themselves and made
obeisance. Here he received reports from different parts of the kingdom.
Expeditiously disposing of State business, he would inspect troops mounted on a
horse or an elephant. Thereafter, he returned to the zanānā, took meals and rested
in the afternoon. In the late afternoon, he would come to the Saman Burj and
transact business for four hours.
The letters contain valuable information about Raṇjīt Siṅgh's financial, military
and judicial administration during the earlier period of his reign. For example, the
extent to which the Mahārājā had succeeded in training and reorganizing his forces
on Western model, even before the advent of European officers, is revealed through
his consistent endeavours in this behalf and through the names of battalion and
higher commanders mentioned. The instructions issued to his 'adālatīs or justices
indicate his concern for impartiality in the administration of justice. The frequent
mention of joṛīs, lit. pairs, who bring news from distant districts, even from foreign
courts and offices, reveals the elaborate system of speedy and efficient intelligencegathering which then exist.
Bhagat Siṅgh

AKHBĀR-I-DARBĀR-I-MU'ALLĀ, in Persian, News of the Exalted (Imperial Mughal)

Court (darbār), was not, as the title suggests, exclusively news of the royal court.
They were, broadly speaking, court bulletins which included, besides provincial
newsletters and reports of generals and governors, orders, activities and
observations of the emperors, appointments, promotions, transfers, dismissals and
references to other matters of State. The Mughal emperors had an elaborate system
for the collection of news from all parts of the country through a network of officials,
newswriters called Akhbār-nawīs, waqā'i-nawīs or waqā' i-nigār, who regularly sent
their news-sheets or reports to the imperial capital, where a regular department
existed for the compilation of day-to-day news of the kingdom for presentation to
the emperor for his information or orders. Copies of these bulletins were kept by
feudatory chiefs, officers and governors through their vakīls or agents stationed at
the capital. There is an invaluable stock of such news bulletins, in Persian, at Jaipur,
now partly transferred to Bīkāner, in Rājasthān, covering the period from 1650 to
1730 with some gaps. Especially noteworthy is news from the Punjab from 1708 to
1716 when it faced a strong armed uprising led by the Sikh warrior Bandā Siṅgh
Bahādur. The late Dr Gaṇḍā Siṅgh scrutinized these papers from September 1944 to
January 1945 and prepared a manuscript, comprising extracts of reports pertaining
to the Punjab, with special reference to the Sikhs. This manuscript, Akhbār-i-Darbāri-Mu'allā, is now preserved in the Punjabi University Library, to which the learned
historian had donated his entire collection of books, manuscripts and papers. The
Akhbār manuscript comprises 220 foolscap pages and embraces events from the
ninth year of Auraṅgzīb's reign to the seventh of Farrukh Sīyar's, i. e. from 1667 to
1719. In the news of Auraṅgzīb's reign there are wide gaps, yet the manuscript
provides interesting and authentic details about the Sikh movement from 1708 to
1716, and about the efforts made by the imperial government to suppress it.
Although a contemporary record, the contents of the Akhbār have to be used with
caution because at places the newswriters have been victims of grave
misunderstanding or prejudice. For example, Bandā Siṅgh has been referred to
variously as Gurū, Gobind, Gurū Gobind and Gurū Gobind Siṅgh. Similarly, Ajīt Siṅgh
of the Akhbār was the adopted son of Mātā Sundarī, widow of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh,
and not Sāhibzādā Ajīt Siṅgh, the real son of the Gurū.
As revealed by the Akhbār, the Sikh movement under Bandā Siṅgh had a
strong base in the villages. As soon as he started his operations in the Punjab, the
peasants promptly rallied round him and accepted him as their overlord. During the
entire period of their struggle against the Mughals, Bandā Siṅgh and his Sikhs could
move almost unchecked in the eastern part of the Punjab. The zamīndārs of the
Punjab, mainly of the northeastern districts of Bārī Doāb, supplied arms and horses
to Bandā Siṅgh and many of the hill chiefs of the Śivālik ranges provided him shelter.
However, this does not mean that there was no opposition from any of the
zamīndārs. Besides the Muslim zamīndārs, many Hindu chiefs also sided with the
Mughals mainly with a view to escaping harassment at the hands of the government.
For instance, in the early stages, Bhūp Parkāsh, son of Harī Parkāsh, ruler of Nāhan,
supported the cause of Bandā Siṅgh. According to the Akhbār, Bhūp Parkāsh was
called to Delhi and imprisoned. In order to prove her loyalty to the Emperor, Bhūp
Parkāsh's mother captured many Sikhs and sent them to Delhi for execution or
imprisonment. The zamīndārs of Kumāoṅ and Sirmūr, too, were hostile to Bandā
Siṅgh.

According to the entry, dated 10 December 1710, the Emperor asked Bakhshī
ul-Mumālik Mahābat Khān that under his name orders should be issued to the
faujdārs around Shāhjahānābād that wherever Nānak-worshippers be found they
should be executed. This order was repeated by Emperor Farrukh-Sīyar in almost the
same words. There are news items in the Akhbār-i-Darbār-i-Mu'allā about the help
rendered to Bandā Siṅgh by the banjārās, grain carriers, who moved about in all
parts of the country plying their trade. It is recorded in the Akhbār that on 11
October 1711, forty banjārās, who were Nānak-worshippers, were brought to Delhi
and on their refusing to accept Islam were executed under the orders of the
Emperor. In a newsletter of 28 October 1711, it was reported to the Emperor that
the Hindu faqirs, yogīs, sannyāsīs and bairāgīs conveyed the news of the Imperial
court to Bandā Siṅgh. A newsletter of 29 May 1711 shows that the Mughal Emperor
Bahādur Shāh had issued an edict ordering the mutasaddis (accountants) to realize
Jizyah from the Nānak-worshippers at a double rate. A newsletter of 9 November
1713 records that Emperor Farrukh Sīyar ordered that the kotwāl of Delhi should
announce it with the beat of drum that the Hindus should not ride palanquins and
horses of Iraqi and Arab breed. None of the Hindus should play or celebrate holī.
Despite the ruthlessly repressive measures adopted by the government, Bandā
Siṅgh did not resile from his liberal principles. The newsletter of 28 April 1711
records Bandā Siṅgh's promise and proclamation: "I do not oppress the Muslims. "
For every Muslim who approached him, he fixed a daily allowance and wage and
took good care of him. Another newsletter, dated 21 April 1711, records that Bandā
Siṅgh permitted Muslims to recite khutbā and nāmāz. 5, 000 Muslims had gathered
around him.
From the news it is evident how seriously the Mughal authority took Bandā
Siṅgh's revolt and how thorough were the operations launched against the Sikhs.
Commanders and officers of very high rank were deputed by the Emperor to fight
against them with all the resources at their command. According to newsletter,
dated 20 October 1710, Fīroz Khān Mewātī chopped off 300 heads of the rebel Sikhs
and made a gift of these to the Emperor. According to the newsletter of 6 December
1710, Amīn Khān Bahādur wrote to the Emperor that he had killed one thousand
Sikhs at Sirhind. He sent 500 heads of the Sikhs to the Emperor who ordered them
to be publically displayed. According to the newsletter of 29 November 1713, 'Abd
us-Samad Khān carried 900 heads of Nānak-worshippers to Delhi. The heads were
exhibited in the Chāndnī Chowk Bāzār.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bhagat Singh, trans. and ed. , Akhbār-i-Darbār-i-Mu'allā. Patiala, 1984
Bhagat Siṅgh

ĀKIL DĀS, an eighteenth-century head of the Handālī sect of Jaṇḍiālā in Amritsar
district of the Punjab, also known as Haribhagat Nirañjaṇīā, was an inveterate
enemy of the Sikhs. Giānī Giān Siṅgh, Shamsher Khālsā, describes him as "Ākul Dās
who basked in the name of Haribhagat. " He was a State informer and revelled in
spying on the Sikhs. He had many of them arrested and executed. Most prominent
among his victims were Bhāī Tārū Siṅgh and Bhāī Matāb Siṅgh Mīrāṅkoṭīā. On his
information, Adīnā Beg Khān, governor of the Punjab, in 1758, despatched him
along with Dīwān Hīrā Mall against Sikhs, reportedly assembled in the
neighbourhood of Adīnānagar, in present-day Gurdāspur district. In the fierce battle
that took place near Qādīāṅ, Dīwān Hīrā Mall was killed but Ākil Dās escaped. At the
open assembly at Amritsar on the occasion of Dīvālī, in October 1761, the Sarbatt
Khālsā adopted a gurmatā or resolution to the effect that they must punish Ākil Dās
for his Sikh-baiting. Information leaked out to Ākil Dās who forthwith despatched
messengers to Ahmad Shāh Durrānī seeking his help and protection in consideration
of his previous services. Sikhs besieged Jaṇḍiālā in January 1762 and would have
captured the town but the wily Handālī suspended shanks of beef from the fort
walls. This was a ruse he tried to exploit the religious scruples of the besiegers and
make them retire from the scene. They did lift the siege and dispersed towards
Sirhind.
Ākil Dās had figured prominently in the episode of the martyrdom of Bhāī Tārū
Siṅgh in 1745. To quote Ratan Siṅgh Bhaṅgū, Prāchīn Panth Prakāsh, "Once the
governor of Lahore asked his men, from where do the Sikhs obtain their
nourishment? I have debarred them from all occupations. They realize no taxes.
They do not farm, nor are they allowed to do business or join public employment. I
have stopped all offerings to their places of worship. No provisions or supplies are
accessible to them. Why do they not die of sheer starvation? My troops bar their
way. They search for them and they kill them where they see them. I have burnt
down entire villages with Sikh populations. I have destroyed their remotest kin. I
have ferreted them out of the holes and slaughtered them. The Mughals are hawks;
the Sikhs are like quail. Vast numbers of them have been ensnared and killed. No
one can live without food. I know not how the Sikhs survive without it?'
“Haribhagat Nirañjaṇīā, who was a sworn foe of the Sikhs answered, 'There
are Sikhs in this world who would not eat until they have fed their brethren. They
may themselves go without clothes and food, but cannot bear their comrades'
distress. They will pass the cold season by fireside and send them their own clothes.
Some will sweat to grind corn and have it sent to them. They will do the roughest
chores to earn a small wage for their sake. They migrate to distant places to eke out
money for their brothers in exile. '
“The Nawāb shook his head in despair, 'They are unyielding people indeed.
Their annihilation is beyond our power. God alone will destroy them. ' Haribhagat
Nirañjaṇīā spoke again. 'In the village of Pūhlā, in Mājhā, lives one, Tārū Siṅgh. He
tills his land and pays the revenue to the official. He eats but little and sends what
he saves to his brothers in the forest. He has his mother and a sister who both toil
and grind to make a living. They eat sparingly and they wear the coarsest
homespun. Whatever they save, they pass on to the Sikhs. Besides the Sikhs, they
own none other. They recite the hymns of their Gurūs. Death they do not dread.
They visit not the Gaṅgā or the Yamunā. They bathe in the tank constructed by their
own Gurū. '”

An officer was immediately sent with soldiers to apprehend Tārū Siṅgh. Tārū
Siṅgh was captured and brought to Lahore. He was thrown into jail where he was
given many tortures. But, says the Prāchīn Panth Prakāsh, "as the Turks tormented
Tārū Siṅgh, ruddier became his cheeks with joy. As he was starved of food and
drink, contentment reigned on his face. He was rejoiced to comply with the Gurū's
will. "
Eventually, Tārū Siṅgh was presented before the Nawāb. He greeted him with
the Sikh salutation, Vāhigurū jī kā Khālsā, Vāhigurū jī kī Fateh, defiantly uttered. The
Nawāb felt startled "as if some one had slit his finger and sprinkled salt on it. "
Tārū Siṅgh spoke out, "If we till your lands, we pay the revenue. If we engage
in commerce, we pay taxes. What is left after our payments to you is for our bellies.
What we save from our mouths, we give to our brethren. We take nothing from you.
Why do you then punish us?" The Nawāb was in a rage and pronounced, "if you
become a Mussalmān, then alone will I remit your life. "
"How do I fear for my life? Why must I become a Mussalmān? Don't
Mussalmāns die? Why should I abandon my faith? May my faith endure until my last
hair, the last hair on my head-until my last breath, " said Tārū Siṅgh.
The Nawāb tried to tempt him with offers of lands and wealth. When he found
Tārū Siṅgh inflexible, he decided to have his scalp scraped from his head. The
barbers came with sharp lancets and slowly ripped Bhāī Tārū Siṅgh's skull. He
rejoiced that the hair of his head was still intact.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Bhaṅgū, Ratan Siṅgh, Prāchīn Paṅth Prakāsh [Reprint]. Amritsar, 1962
Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Shamsher Khālsā [Reprint]. Patiala, 1970
Gupta, Hari Ram, History of the Sikhs, vol. II. Delhi, 1978
Harbans Singh, The Heritage of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1983
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AKOĪ, village 4 km north of Saṅgrūr (30º-14'N, 75º-50'E) in the Punjab, has an old
historical shrine in memory of Gurū Hargobind, who is believed to have visited it
during his travels through the Mālvā region in 1616. Here he was served with
devotion by one Bhāī Māṇak Chand. After the Gurū's departure he constructed a
memorial on the spot where the Gurū had stayed, on the northern edge of the
village and where Gurdwārā Sāhib Pātshāhī Chhevīṅ was later established. According
to local tradition, Gurū Nānak had also visited Akoī. The building constructed by
Sardār Dīvān Siṅgh of Baḍrukkhāṅ still survives. It consists of a small room for the
Gurū Granth Sāhib, in a long and narrow hall, with a vaulted roof. A new hall,
including the sanctum was constructed adjacent to the old building in 1979. A new
complex comprising the Gurū kā Laṅgar and lodgings for pilgrims has also been
added. The Gurdwārā owns 50 acres of land in three of the surrounding villages and
is managed by a local committee under the auspices of the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā
Parbandhak Committee.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Tārā Siṅgh, Srī Gur Tīrath Saṅgrahi. Amritsar, n. d.
Ṭhākar Siṅgh, Giānī, Srī Gurduāre Darshan. Amritsar, 1923
Jagjīt Siṅgh

ĀKUL, BHĀĪ, a resident of Sultānpur Lodhī in present-day Kapūrthalā district of the
Punjab, embraced the Sikh faith in the time of Gurū Amar Dās. Bhāī Gurdās in his
Vārāṅ praises his sincerity and devotion to the Gurū. Once Bhāī Ākul, along with
several others from his village, waited on Gurū Arjan and begged to be instructed in
how sāttvika guṇas, or qualities of purity and goodness, might be cultivated. The
Gurū explained that virtuous living was essential to spiritual well-being. He further
said that simplicity, cleanliness, readiness to serve others, association with the
virtuous and concentration on the Divine Name aided in moral refinement. Ākul and
his companions returned to their village enlightened. The Gurū, according to Bhāī
Manī Siṅgh, Sikhāṅ di Bhagat Mālā, remarked, "Sultānpur is my devotees' citadel. "
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Manī Siṅgh, Bhāī, Sikhāṅ di Bhagat Mālā. Amritsar, 1955
Tāran Siṅgh

ĀLĀ SIṄGH, BĀBĀ (1691-1765), Sikh misl leader who became the first ruling chief of
Paṭiālā, was born in 1691 at Phūl, in present-day Baṭhiṇḍā district of the Punjab, the
third son of Bhāī Rām Siṅgh. His grandfather, Bābā Phūl, had been as a small boy
blessed by Gurū Hargobind, Nānak VI. Ālā Siṅgh's father and his uncle, Tilok Siṅgh,
had both received the rites of initiation at the hands of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh who
conferred on their family the panegyric, "Your house is mine own. "
Ālā Siṅgh was married at an early age to Fateh Kaur, popularly known as Māī
Fatto, daughter of Chaudharī Kālā of Khānā, a zamīndār of the village Kāleke, now in
Saṅgrūr district of the Punjab, and had three sons, Bhūmīā Siṅgh, Sardūl Siṅgh and
Lāl Siṅgh, all of whom died in his lifetime, and a daughter, Bībī Pardhān.
Ālā Siṅgh's career of conquest began soon after the execution of Bandā Siṅgh
Bahādur in 1716 when central Punjab lay in utter confusion. Ālā Siṅgh was living at
Phūl about 40 km from Baṭhiṇḍā. He gathered around him a band of dashing and
daring young men. In 1722, he set up his headquarters at Barnālā, 32 km farther
east, and his territory comprised 30-odd villages. At Barnālā, Ālā Siṅgh defeated in
1731 Rāi Kalhā of Rāikoṭ, an influential chief with a large force at his command.
Aided by roving bands of the Dal Khālsā, he ransacked and annexed several villages
belonging to the Bhaṭṭīs. He also founded several new villages such as Chhājalī,
Diṛbā, Lauṅgovāl and Sheroṅ. For a period Ālā Siṅgh remained in the custody of 'Alī
Muhammad Khān Ruhīlā, Mughal governor of Sirhind from 1745-48, and was
released only when the latter fled his capital at the approach in February 1748 of the
Afghān invader Ahmad Shāh Durrānī. In the battle fought on 11 March 1748, near
Mānūpūr, 15 km northwest of Sirhind, between the Mughals and Ahmad Shāh
Durrānī, Ālā Siṅgh sided with the former. He cut off Durrānī's supplies and captured
his camels and horses. In 1749, Ālā Siṅgh defeated and repulsed Farīd Khān, a
Rājpūt chieftain, who had sought the help of the imperial governor of Sirhind and
stopped the construction by him of a fort at Bhavānīgaṛh. Three years later, Ālā
Siṅgh, captured the district of Sanaur, called chaurāsī, lit. eighty-four, from the
number of the villages it comprised. One of these where he built a fort in 1763 and
which was thenceforth his permanent seat, became famous as Paṭiālā. At the end of
1760, Ālā Siṅgh possessed 726 villages including many towns. On the eve of the
battle of Pānīpat (1761) when the Marāṭhās' camp was blockaded by Ahmad Shāh
Durrānī, Ālā Siṅgh helped them with foodgrain and other provisions. In the Vaḍḍā
Ghallūghārā or Great Carnage of February 1762, Ālā Siṅgh remained neutral. Ahmad
Shāh punished him with the devastation of the town of Barnālā. Ālā Siṅgh, who
presented himself in the Shāh's camp, was ordered to shave off his head and beard.
This he declined to do and offered instead to pay a sum of one and a quarter lakh of
rupees. The Shāh accepted the money but had him taken to Lahore where he
secured his freedom by paying another five lakh of rupees.
Ālā Siṅgh took the pāhul in 1732 at the hands of Nawāb Kapur Siṅgh, leader of
the Dal Khālsā. He was an ally of Jassā Siṅgh Āhlūvālīā in the attack on Sirhind in
1764. Later he purchased this town from Bhāī Buḍḍhā Siṅgh to whom it had been
assigned by the Khālsā. On 29 March 1761, Ahmad Shāh Durrānī had already
recognized by a written decree the sovereignty of Ālā Siṅgh over the territories held
by him. At the time of his seventh invasion of India, he confirmed him in the
government of Sirhind (1765) and granted him the title of Rājā, with the robes of
honour as well as with a drum and a banner as insignia of royalty.

Ālā Siṅgh died on 7 August 1765 at Paṭiālā and was cremated in the Fort, now
inside the city.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Kirpal Siṅgh, Life of Maharaja Ala Singh and His Times. Amritsar, 1954
Griffin, Lepel, The Rajas of the Punjab [Reprint]. Delhi, 1977
Latif, Syad Muhammad, History of the Panjab. Delhi, 1964
Bhagat Siṅgh

ALĀHṆĪĀṄ, Gurū Nānak's composition in measure Vaḍahaṅs in the Gurū Granth
Sāhib. Ālāhṇī, generally used in its plural form alāhṇīāṅ, is a dirge wailingly sung in

chorus by women mourning the death of a relation. Etymologically, the word means
an utterance in praise (of the departed person). The sorrowful singing of alāhṇīāṅ is
part of the mourning custom of siāpā. The women assemble at the house of the
dead person and cry aloud beating their breasts while standing, or sit together and
bewail. They weep bitterly and sing alāhṇīāṅ in most pathetic tones. The village
barbress (naiṇ) or mirāsāṇ starts the alāhṇi by singing aloud the first line of the
dirge eulogizing the dead person, followed by the group in chorus. The siāpā goes
on continually for a number of days until the last ceremonies are held; and the
relatives of the deceased keep coming from far and near, the women joining in the
heart-rending wail from day to day.

Alāhṇī is also a poetic form in Punjabi in the style of this mourning song. The
strain may alter with the subject. Gurū Nānak employed this mode in his bāṇī, as he
adopted several other popular and folk forms. Five of his śabdas (hymns) included in
the Gurū Granth Sāhib in Rāga Vaḍahaṅs (pp. 578 to 582) are entitled Alāhṇīāṅ. In

these hymns, the sovereignty of God's Will is proclaimed. By implication, the
customs of siāpā and alāhṇīāṅ are deprecated. One must not give way to idle
wailing, but learn to accept what has been ordained by the Almighty. The reality of
death is brought home to man. "As man hath come into this world, so must he
depart?" The recitation of Alāhnīāṅ brings solace to the grief-afflicted soul and leads
it to seek shelter in God. Surrender to His Will is the burden of this verse. "None
ever die with the dead, " says Gurū Nānak. "Blessed is he who praises the Lord's
merits and weeps in fear of Him. They who bewail by remembering Him are through
the ages acknowledged wise. "
Death is inevitable. But death is for the manmukh; one who is ruled by his own
ego, one who has turned away from God. Death is not for the gurmukh who is
turned towards God. By nām simran, i. e. constant remembrance of the Name of
God, one discards the fear of death. This is the way to achieving the state of
fearlessness, the state of liberation and everlastingness. He is truly triumphant in the
world who absorbs himself in nām and is firm in his faith, who performs his worldly
duty and yet remains unattached, always ready to leave the world without sorrow.
One, who submits to the Will of the Lord and leads a pious life, lives in peace and
tranquillity and dreads not the call of death. Death for such virtuous persons is a
victory. All have to reach the same destination, says Gurū Nānak. Instead of crying
and wailing at the death of a relation, men should sit together and sing the praise of
God.
The poetic metre used in Alāhṇīāṅ corresponds the tune in which this folk form
is cast. It is a kind of duvaiyā chhand, in which last line of each śabda echoes the
burden of the in the first part of Alāhṇīāṅ. The language is Sādh Bhākhā with a
strong flavour of Lahndī dialect. Alliteration has been used and new compounds
formed to make the lines musical. Some of the verses convey the eternal truths in
such homely yet terse language that they have become part of Punjabi speech. For
instance: "jehā likhīā tehā pāiā" as is it foreordained for one, so does one receive,
and "ko mara nā moiā nāle” - none ever die with the dead.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1.
2.

Kohli, Surindar Siṅgh, A Critical Study of Adi Granth. Delhi, 1961
Tāran Siṅgh Srī Gurū Granth Sāhib Jī dā Sāhitak Itihās. Amritsar, n. d.
Harcharan Siṅgh

ĀLAM CHAND was a masand or parish leader at Lahore in Gurū Arjan's time. He was
known for his pious and honest ways. He brought to the Gurū regularly offerings
collected from the Lahore saṅgat. His favourite maxim, tells Bhāī Manī Siṅgh in the
Sikhāṅ di Bhagat Mālā, was that the use for oneself even of a kauḍī, i. e. the
smallest coin, out of the offerings was injurious to one's body as well as to one's
soul.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Manī Siṅgh, Bhāī, Sikhāṅ dī Bhagat Mālā. Amritsar, 1955
Santokh Siṅgh, Bhāī, Srī Gur Pratāp Sūraj Granth. Amritsar, 1926-37
Tāran Siṅgh

ĀLAM CHAND HĀṆḌĀ, a Sikh of Gurū Arjan's time. As says Bhāī Manī Siṅgh, Sikhāṅ
dī Bhagat Mālā, Ālam Chand, along with Bhāī Murārī Anand, Bhāī Kaliāṇā, Bhāī
Nānoṅ, Bhāī Laṭkan of Bindrāo clan, and Bhāī Saisārū Talvāṛ, once came to the Gurū
and spoke with folded hands, "O support of the supportless, show us the way to
liberation. " The Gurū said, "Practise the śabda, or the sacred word, and serve
others. " Ālam Chand said, "Lord, our minds are humble as long as we are listening
to the sacred hymns, but they go wayward the moment we leave the saṅgat. " Gurū
Arjan explained : "Constant practice is the remedy. Pride results from ignorance
accumulated through several births. Persevere, therefore; and you will gain humility.
" Ālam Chand and his companions bowed their head in reverence.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Manī Siṅgh, Bhāī, Sikhāṅ dī Bhagat Mālā. Amritsar, 1955
Santokh Siṅgh, Bhāī, Srī Gur Pratāp Sūraj Granth. Amritsar, 1926-37
Tāran Siṅgh

'ĀLAM KHĀN, son of Nihaṅg Khān of Koṭla Nihaṅg Khān and son-in-law of Rāi Kalhā,
the chief of Rāikoṭ, was a devotee of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh. According to Sarūp Siṅgh
Kaushish, Gurū kīāṅ Sākhīāṅ, he was with Rāi Kalhā when he met Gurū Gobind Siṅgh
passing through Rāikoṭ after having left Chamkaur on 8 December 1705.
Also, See NIHANG KHAN
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Padam, Piārā Siṅgh, and Giānī Garjā Siṅgh, eds. , Gurū kīāṅ Sākhīāṅ. Patiala,
1986
Anand, Balwant Singh, Gurū Tegh Bahadur. Delhi, 1979
Gurnek Siṅgh

ĀLAM SIṄGH NACHNĀ (d. 1705), a warrior in the retinue of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, was
the son of Bhāī Durgū, a Rājpūt Sikh of Siālkoṭ. He earned the popular epithet
Nachnā (lit. dancer) because of his uncommon agility. Sarūp Dās Bhallā, Mahimā
Prakāsh, describes him as one of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's constant companions.
Possessing pluck as well as skill, he once killed a tiger single-handed. On another
occasion when during the chase Gurū Gobind Siṅgh was suddenly attacked by two
hill chiefs, Balīā Chand and Ālam Chand, with a force far outnumbering his own,
Ālam Siṅgh Nachnā showed exemplary courage. In a face to face encounter with
Ālam Chand, he slashed the latter's sword arm. He took part in almost all the battles
fought around Anandpur. As Gurū Gobind Siṅgh himself testifies in his Bachitra
Nāṭak, when Khānzādā, the son of Dilāwar Khān, Sūbahdār of Lahore, tried to storm
Anandpur at night, it was Ālam Siṅgh's vigilance which alerted the Sikhs and forced
the Khānzādā to retire without attempting the assault. During the final siege of
Anandpur, Ālam Siṅgh was given the command of a 500 strong garrison in Agampur
Fort; on the evacuation of the town, he along with Bhāī Dayā Siṅgh and Bhāī Ude
Siṅgh led the vanguard. At Chamkaur on 7 December 1705, Ālam Siṅgh Nachnā
joined the sally made by Sāhibzādā Ajīt Siṅgh and fell fighting the besieging host.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Bhallā, Sarūp Dās, Mahimā Prakāsh. Patiala, 1971
Kuir Siṅgh, Gurbilās Pātshāhī 10. Patiala, 1968
Macauliffe, Max Arthur, The Sikh Religion. Oxford, 1909
Harbans Singh, Gurū Gobind Siṅgh. Chandigarh, 1966
Piārā Siṅgh Padam

'ĀLAMGĪR, a village in Ludhiāṇā district, 13 km to the southwest of the city (30º54'N, 75º-52'E), is famed for its Gurdwārā Mañjī Sāhib Pātshāhī 10. Gurū Gobind
Siṅgh made a halt in the village as he was travelling after the battle of Chamkaur in
December 1705. Here the Gurū discarded the palanquin which he had used for part
of the journey, and took a horse presented by an old disciple, Bhāī Naudhā. A Mañjī
Sāhib was later constructed on the site. At present, the gurdwārā compound covers
over three acres of land. A four-storeyed gateway topped over by a small lotus dome
opens on a vast paved courtyard across which is the central building-a dīvān hall,
with a verandah all around. The prakāsh asthān adjoining the hall has a basement
marking the original site of the Mañjī Sāhib. Above the prakāsh asthān there is a 3
storeyed domed tower with domed turrets at the corners. For larger gatherings on
festivals, a vast shelter of reinforced concrete was built in 1969 in honour of the
500th anniversary of the birth of Gurū Nānak. The dining hall can accommodate 2,
000 persons at a time. There are several blocks of residential rooms for staff and
pilgrims. A legend has grown around the 63 metre square sarovar, the holy tank,
called Tīr Sar. It is said that the Gurū shot down a huge python occupying the only
well in the vicinity. But the monster bled so profusely that it made the water of the
well unfit for drinking. There being no other source of water near by, the Gurū shot
another arrow into the ground and caused clean water to spring forth. The pool so
formed came to be named after the arrow (tīr). People still believe that the water of
this pool cures diseases. A three-day fair is held at 'Ālamgir from 14-16 Poh
(December-end) every year.
The management of Gurdwārā Mañjī Sāhib is in the hands of a local committee
under the control of the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Tārā Siṅgh, Srī Gur Tīrath Saṅgrahi. Amritsar, n. d.
Ṭhākar Siṅgh, Giānī, Srī Gurduāre Darshan. Amritsar, 1923
Randhir, G. S. , Sikh Shrines in India. Delhi, 1990
Jagjīt Siṅgh

'ĀLAMPUR, village 11 km southwest of Dasūyā (31º-49'N, 75º-39'E) in Hoshiārpur
district of the Punjab, is sacred to Gurū Hargobind (1595-1644), who stayed here for
several days during an hunting expedition. The place where he pitched his tents
(tambū, in Punjabi) came to be treated as holy. The shrine subsequently established
here was called Gurdwārā Tambū Sāhib Pātshāhī Chhevīṅ. Situated on a low mound
about 250 metres south of the village, it was endowed during Sikh rule with a land
grant of 75 acres. Its present building constructed by the local saṅgat in 1983 is a
small rectangular hall with the sanctum at one end. The Gurdwārā is affiliated to
Nirmal Akhāṛā and is managed by Nirmalā priests.
Jagjīt Siṅgh

ALEXANDER alias MUHAMMAD SADĪQ, a European of unknown nationality, who
drifted to Lahore in 1841 from Kābul, where he had served in Shāh Shujā's army,
and had adopted the Muslim faith. He joined the Khālsā army as a battalion
commander serving under John Holmes.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Grey, C. , European Adventures of Northern India, 1785-1849 [Reprint]. Patiala,
1970
Gulcharan Siṅgh

'ALĪ SHER, village 18 km north of Mānsā (29º-59'N, 75º-23'E) in Bathiṇḍā district of
the Punjab, was visited by Gurū Tegh Bahādur during his travels in the Mālvā region.
Arriving from Pandher, he sat outside the village. The pañchāyat, or village elders, of
Pandher, who had shown little attention to him in their own village, on realizing their
error came to 'Alī Sher to ask for pardon. They brought with them offerings of guṛ
(jaggery) and money. On the way they met a person who was returning after seeing
the Gurū. They asked his advice as to what offerings they might present to the Gurū
to have their lapse condoned. He replied, "None. The Gurū is compassionate. He
overlooks the faults of others. " The residents of Pandher distributed amongst
themselves the guṛ and money they had brought, and went to the Gurū empty
handed. The Gurū instructed them in the path of virtue and honest living.
The shrine established in memory of Gurū Tegh Bahādur was developed into a
proper gurdwārā during the nineteenth century and was endowed by the rulers of
Paṭiālā in whose territory 'Alī Sher lay. The Gurdwārā now owns 12 acres of land and
is administered by the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Ṭhākar Siṅgh, Giānī, Srī Gurduāre Darshan. Amritsar, 1923
Tārā Singh, Srī Gur Tīrath Saṅgrahi. Amritsar, n. d.
Mālvā Desh Raṭan dī Sākhī Pothī. Amritsar, 1968
Harbans Singh, Guru Tegh Bahadur. Delhi, 1982
Jagjīt Siṅgh

ĀLĪ SIṄGH (d. 1716), a native of the village of Salaūdī, near Sirhind, was in the
service of Wazīr Khān, the Mughal faujdār of Sirhind. According to Ratan Siṅgh
Bhaṅgū, Prāchīn Panth Prakāsh, Wazīr Khān, on learning of Bandā Siṅgh's advance
from the South towards the Punjab under the orders of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, called Ālī
Siṅgh to his presence and taunted him with the remark that another Gurū of theirs
had appeared and that he should join him and bring him to Sirhind to be despatched
after the previous Gurū's sons. Ālī Siṅgh took his comment as an insult. Wazīr Khān
put him into prison from where he escaped and joined Bandā Siṅgh's ranks. Ālī
Siṅgh took part in battles fought at Samāṇā and Saḍhaurā. In the battle of Sirhind
fought on 12 May 1710 at the nearby village of Chappar Chīṛī, he was one of the
commanders of the Mālvā Sikhs. After the sack of Sirhind, he was appointed deputy
governor of the town under Bāj Siṅgh. Ālī Siṅgh was captured in Lohgaṛh in 1710,
while defending the fortress against the Mughal onslaught and after several years of
imprisonment, was put to death in Delhi in June 1716 with Bandā Siṅgh Bahādur
and his men seized in Gurdās-Naṅgal.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Bhaṅgū, Ratan Siṅgh, Prāchīn Panth Prakāsh [Reprint]. Amritsar, 1962
Gaṇḍā Siṅgh, Bandā Siṅgh Bahādur. Amritsar, 1964
Gurdev Siṅgh Deol

ALIF KHĀN, who is mentioned in Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's Bachitra Nāṭak, was an officer
in the Mughal army of Auraṅgzīb. In 1691, he was despatched by Mīāṅ Khān, the
viceroy of Jammū, to Kāṅgṛā for collecting arrears of tribute from the hill chiefs. Rājā
Kirpāl Chand Kāṭoch of Kāṅgṛā and Rājā Dyāl of Bijhaṛval submitted to Alif Khān, but
not Rājā Bhīm Chand of Kahlūr. Bhīm Chand enlisted the support of several of the
chieftains against Alif Khān. He also requested Gurū Gobind Siṅgh for help. The
combined force reached Nadauṇ, on the bank of the River Beās, 32 km southeast of
Kāṅgṛā. Kirpāl Chand Kaṭoch and Rājā Dyāl sided with the Mughal general. The
battle in which Gurū Gobind Siṅgh himself took part was fought on 20 March 1691.
Gurū Gobind Siṅgh described the action in his Bachitra Nāṭak in vivid and rousing
verse. Alif Khān fled in utter disarray "without being able to fold up his camp. "
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Bachitra Nāṭak.
Kuir Siṅgh, Gurbilās Pātshāhī 10. Patiala, 1968
Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Twārīkh Gurū Khālsā [Reprint]. Patiala, 1970
Macauliffe, Max Arthur, The Sikh Religion, Oxford, 1909
Harbans Singh, Guru Gobind Singh. Chandigarh, 1966
Bhagat Siṅgh

'ĀLIM, a Muslim poet, enjoyed the patronage of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh. Formerly in the
employ of Prince Mu'azzam (later Emperor Bahādur Shāh), he probably came to
Gurū Gobind Siṅgh sometime during the period 1687-94 when the prince, having
fallen from the favour of his father, Auraṅgzīb, was under internment. Only a single
stanza of 'Ālam in Hindi, in Gurmukhī script, survives in which he celebrates the
bounty of his master, Gurū Gobind Siṅgh.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Padam, Piārā Siṅgh, Gurū Gobind Siṅgh Jī de Darbārī Ratan. Patiala, 1976
Piārā Siṅgh Padam

ALLĀHĀBĀD (25º-28'N, 81º-50'E), Prayāg before the reign of Emperor Akbar, was
visited by Gurū Nānak in the course of his first preaching journey to the east in the
first quarter of the sixteenth century. In 1666, Gurū Tegh Bahādur visited the town
and stayed in the house of a devotee in Mohallā Aihīyāpur. Gurdwārā Tap Asthān
(Pakkī Saṅgat) Srī Gurū Tegh Bahādur Jī Pātshāhī 9 marks the place where Gurū
Tegh Bahādur had put up. It became a centre for the congregation of Sikh devotees
and was called Pakkī Saṅgat (Permanent Congregation). Later it came to be served
by Nirmalā priests who still administer it. Mahant Prītam Siṅgh (d. 1972) rebuilt the
shrine in 1965. A domed two-storeyed gateway leads to the dīvān hall where the
Gurū Granth Sāhib is seated in a marble pālakī. One of the side rooms has a large
portrait of Gurū Tegh Bahādur placed on a square platform. This is meant to mark
the apartment used by the Gurū as a bedroom at the time of his visit.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Ṭhākar Siṅgh, Giānī. Srī Gurduāre Darshan. Amritsar, 1923
Tārā Siṅgh Srī Gur Tīrath Saṅgrahi. Amritsar, n. d.
Randhir, G. S. , Sikh Shrines in India. Delhi. 1990
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

ALLĀHDĀD KHĀN (d. 1843) was the last ruler of Khaṭṭekhēl family of Ṭonk, situated
in Bannū district, on the northwest frontier. When Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh conquered
this region in 1821, Allāhdād Khān became a tributary of the Sikh government. As
the tribute had fallen in arrears, an expedition was sent against Ṭoṅk in 1836.
Allāhdād Khān fled, but he continued his intrigues against the Sikhs. In 1843, Fateh
Khān Ṭiwāṇā, who was sent to curb his revolt, proposed that Allāhdād Khān be
appointed governor of Ṭonk to secure peace in the territory. The proposal was still
under consideration of the Lahore Darbār when Allāhdād Khān died.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Griffin, Lepel, The Punjab Chiefs. Lahore, 1890
Gupta, Hari Ram, Panjab on the Eve of First Sikh War. Chandigarh, 1956
Harī Rām Gupta

ALLARD, ACHILLE, a young Muslim boy whose parents had been killed in one of the
battles of Multān, and who was saved by Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh, had been born at
Sayyidpur in the then province of Multān. General Allard noticed his intelligence and
asked the Mahārājā's permission to adopt him. Jacquemont saw him in Lahore, and
Honigberger performed upon him a delicate surgical intervention. In 1834, he was
Christianized and rebaptized Achille by his adopted family. In October 1834, he
accompanied General Allard to Paris. He was educated at the Ecole Speciale de
Commerce in Paris at the expense of the French government. When General Allard
had left for Lahore in June 1836, a regular correspondence went on between Achille
and his foster father through Feuillet de Conches, Head of the Protocol at the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Paris). In 1840, Achille decided to go back to Lahore with
Benjamin Allard in order to settle the succession of General Allard. He fell sick and
died at Lahore in 1841 or 1842.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Lafont, Jean-Marie, "Bannou Pan Dei Allard and the Family of General Allard, "
Journal of Sikh Studies, vol. 2. Amritsar, 1978
Honigberger, John Martin, Thirty-five Years in the East. Calcutta, 1852
J. M. Lafont

ALLARD, BANNOU PĀN DEĪ (1814 1884), born of Rājā Meṅgā Rām of Chambā and
Bannī Pañje Deī at Chambā on 25 January 1814, married Jean Francois Allard, one
of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh's French generals, in March 1826, and bore him seven
children, two of whom died in infancy and are buried in Lahore along with their
father. Allard and his wife also adopted a little orphan, Achille. In 1834, Bannou Pān
Deī, her children and two of her female attendants accompanied Allard to France.
The reason given to Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh for the journey was that the children
needed a Christian education. However, in a newspaper interview in France, Allard
spoke of another reason. His wife being much younger than him and belonging to a
strict Hindu family, he feared she would be obliged to commit satī if he died in the
Punjab.
In July 1835 Bannou Pān Deī settled down in Saint-Tropez and remarried Allard
in a French civil ceremony. Since she was a Hindu, they could not be married in a
church. The children were legitimatized, and Allard made arrangements for their
education between December 1835 and April 1836. He then left France for the
Punjab, never to see his family again.
There are several descriptions in contemporary French press of Bannou Pān
Deī Allard, her guests at Saint-Tropez (Garcin de Tassy, Mme de Salle, an Indian
prince), her travels and her connections with the high society of her time. In 1841
after the demise of her husband, at Peshāwar, she decided to convert to Christianity
(Roman Catholic) and was baptized in the church of Saint-Tropez, the King and the
Queen of France having accepted to be her godfather and godmother. The
ceremony took place in grand style, and General Ventura, who had just arrived in
Marseilles for one of his trips to Europe, attended on her and assisted her in
receiving the guests at her residence in Saint-Tropez.
On 25 July 1845 Madam Allard lost her younger daughter, Felicie (born at
Calcutta 2 February 1835) and she got a special permission to bury her in her
garden, according to the Punjabi custom. She had purchased a new estate in SaintTropez along the sea, where she lived among her souvenirs and paintings. These
paintings, in the possession of the Allard family for five generations, were stolen in
1979. In her bedroom, she got reproduced on a larger scale the painting of the
Allard family showing their seven children all sitting in their garden at Anārkalī. This
included the two deceased children, whereas the original, signed Paris 1836,
represented the five living children. Her faithful maid, Darana, also shown in the
paintings, died in 1861. Her children married into good families. The tradition is still
alive in Saint-Tropez that she never accepted the death of her husband in Peshāwar
in 1839, and every evening she walked to the seaside to wait for him. In 1853, the
fortune of the Allard family was estimated at 462, 000 Francs (Rs, 184, 800) of
which 134, 000F belonged to Bannou Pān Deī and 82, 000 F to each of the four
children. She died at Saint-Tropez on 13 January 1884, and is buried in the Allard
family tomb in the 'Cimetiere Marin' of Saint-Tropez.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Lafont, Jean-Marie, "Banno Pan Dei Allard and the Family of General Allard, "
in, Journal of Sikh Studies, vol. 2. Amritsar, 1978
La Presence francaise dans le Royaume Sikh du Penjab, 1822-1849. Paris,
1992
J. M. Lafont

ALLARD, BENJAMIN (1796 1877), step-brother of General Allard, born at SaintTropez in 1796, was sent to Lahore in 1829 in order to replace his brother as the
military adviser of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh, but the two brothers failed to win the
confidence of the Mahārājā, who would not release General Allard from his duties.
Benjamin then acted as his brother's deputy for various commercial missions
between Lahore and Calcutta, along with Falcon and Meifredy. In 1830 he returned
to Saint-Tropez to manage the General's financial investments in France. From 1835
onwards he looked after Bannou Pān Deī and her children in Saint-Tropez, and in
1840 he returned to Lahore with Achille Allard in order to collect the General's
inheritance. Nothing is known about him after his return to Saint-Tropez, except that
he died there on 6 February 1877.
J. M. Lafont

ALLARD, JEAN FRANCOIS (1785-1839), Chevalier of the Legion of Honour, an order
instituted in 1802 by Napoleon I, was born at Saint-Tropez, France, on 8 March
1785. In 1803, he joined the French army and served in it fighting in the Imperial
Cavalry in far-flung fields in Italy, Spain and Portugal until its final defeat at the
hands of the allies in 1815 when the Imperial Guard, in which he had been serving
as a lieutenant since 1810, was disbanded. Allard returned to Saint-Tropez on demisolde (half-pay), but as soon as he learnt of Napoleon's escape and landing at Golfe
Juan in March 1815, he joined the latter who promoted him Captain on 28 April 1815
and appointed him aide-de-camp to Marechal Brune in Provence and was therefore
not present at Waterloo where Napolean was finally defeated. In 1818 he left for the
Middle East on four months' leave but never re-joined service and was therefore
dismissed from the army on 31 August 1819 for long absence without leave. He
served at Tabriz in Iran from February 1820 to September 1821. By that time the
British government agreed to pay a huge war contribution to Iran on condition that
all French officers in the service of Persia be dismissed and sent back to Europe.
However, Allard and Ventura escaped in disguise towards Kābul and on to India. In
March 1822, Allard arrived at Lahore in company with Ventura, and secured
employment at the court of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh only after the Mahārājā had
ensured that they were French officers of Napolean and not British spies. He was
entrusted with the task of reorganizing the Mahārājā's cavalry on European lines. On
22 May 1822 Allard and Ventura took command of Shaikh Basāwan's Palṭan Khās
and later Palṭan Devā Siṅgh (1822), and the Gurkhā Palṭan (1823). These formed
the infantry of the Fauj-i-Khās. The cavalry (Fransīsī Sowār) was originally formed by
two regiments raised by Allard on 16 July 1822---Rajman (Regiment) Khās Lāṅsīā
(Lancers) and Rajman Daragun (Dragoon). In place of the traditional ghoṛchaṛās,
who protested against the new drills, fresh recruitments were made. Allard raised
another regiment of Dragoons in 1823. By 1825, the Fauj-i-Khās (infantry, cavalry
and artillery) was 5000-6000 strong. The training was based on a French pamphlet
Allard had brought with him. All the words of command were in French. Allard
commanded the whole force, and took orders only from the Mahārājā. Ventura,
under Allard's orders, was in charge of infantry. The uniform of the Fauj-i-Khās was
inspired by the uniform of Napoleon's Grande Armee; the standards of the regiments
were the tricolour French flag inscribed with the motto Vāhigurū Jī Kī Fateh, and
each regiment had the Imperial Eagles. Sikh cavalry, under Allard, had achieved a
very high level of efficiency. His Cuirassiers, a "turbaned edition" of the steel-clad
horsemen of the Garde Imperiale, were the most noble looking troops on parade.
The men and horses were well picked, their accoutrements were of the finest quality
and the regularity and the order in which they manoeuvered could scarcely be
matched by the East India Company's cavalry across the border. Besides the
European form of drill, Allard introduced the use of carbine among the Sikh troops.
Allard's work won high appreciation from the Mahārājā and he came to occupy
position of pre-eminence at the Sikh court. In addition to a salary of Rs 30, 000 a
year, he was granted numerous jāgīrs enabling him to live in style at Lahore. He was
a man of high character and amiable disposition and all foreign travellers passing
through Lahore spoke very highly of him. Raṇjīt Siṅgh considered Allard to be more
a political and military adviser than as a commander in the field, although on
extremely critical occasions he took command of the military forces in operation, as
he did in 1825 in Peshāwar and Ḍerājāt for pacifying the Muslim tribes along the
Indus; in 1827 and 1830 for quelling the jihād of Sayyid Ahmad Barelavī and in 1837
in the attack on Jamrūd after the death of Sardār Harī Siṅgh Nalvā. From 1824

onwards, Allard was also responsible for the security of the Anglo-Sikh border along
the Sutlej, from the Himalayas down to Harī kā Pattaṇ.
The French naturalist Jacquemont, who visited Lahore in 1831, calls him the
Suleman Bey of Raṇjīt Siṅgh. Allard often acted as host to the European visitors to
the Mahārājā's court. On ceremonial occasions, he was chosen for special duties. He,
for instance, escorted Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh at the time of his visit to Ropaṛ in
October 1831 for a meeting with the Governor-General, Lord William Bentinck. Allard
also occasionally informed the Mahārājā about Russian affairs as they were reported
in the French newspapers or in the Russian Gazette (published in French).
In 1834, Allard along with his wife, Bannou Pān Deī, daughter of the chief of
Chambā, whom he had married in 1826 at Lahore, and children proceeded to France
on two years' leave of absence at the expiry of which he returned to the Punjab via
Calcutta in early 1837, bringing for Raṇjīt Siṅgh gifts and a letter of greetings from
Louis Philippe, the King of France.
Allard took part in almost all the major expeditions of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh. In
1838, he was sent to Peshāwar to help General Avitabile in the administration of the
province. On 23 January 1839, he died at Peshāwar, having suffered for some time
from a diseased heart. His body was, as he had wished, brought to Lahore and
buried with full military honours between the tombs of his two daughters in Kuṛī
Bāgh on 19 February.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Lafont, Jean-Marie, La Présence francaise dans le Royaume Sikh du Penjab,
1822-1849. Paris, 1992
Bopearachchi, Osmund, Monnaies greco-bactriennes et indo-grecques.
Catalogue raisonné Paris, 1991
Grey, C. , European Adventurers of Northern India, 1785-1849 (Reprint].
Patiala, 1970
J. M. Lafont

ALLĀYĀR, a wealthy Muslim horse-dealer of Delhi, who turned a preacher of Sikhism,
first came to Gurū Amar Dās at Goindvāl escorted by Bhāī Pāro, a prominent Sikh of
Ḍallā, a village in present-day Kapūrthalā district of the Punjab. It is said that
returning from Kābul once with 500 newly purchased horses, he was held up near
Goindvāl owing to the River Beās being in spate. He had not been there long before
he saw someone tearing across the swollen river on horseback from the opposite
bank. This was Bhāī Pāro coming to make his daily obeisance to Gurū Amar Dās.
Allāyār was still wondering at the man's daring when Bhāī Pāro was again seen
emerging from Goindvāl and preparing to plunge into the river on his way back.
Allāyār beckoned him to come near him and asked him what made him run such a
great risk. Bhāī Pāro replied that he had his Gurū's protection and felt no risk of any
kind. The intrigued merchant begged him to take him to the Gurū who inspired such
faith and confidence in the heart of his disciple. He was led into the Gurū's presence
and was converted at first sight. Gurū Amar Dās remarked to him: "It is difficult to
become a yār (friend) of Allah (God), but I shall make God thy Master and thee His
servant. " 'Allāyār became a disciple. He left his trade to his son, and devoted
himself whole heartedly to the Gurū's service. Gurū Amar Dās appointed him head of
a māñjī or diocese to preach the word of Gurū Nānak. In later life, Allāyār came to
reside near his friend Bhāī Pāro, at village Ḍallā, where a shrine in honour of his
memory still exists.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Santokh Siṅgh, Bhāī, Srī Gur Pratāp Sūraj Granth. Amritsar, 1926-37
Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Twārīkh Gurū Khālsā [Reprint]. Patiala, 1970
Balbīr Siṅgh Dil

ALL-PARTIES CONFERENCES (more aptly, ALL-PARTY CONFERENCES), a series of
conventions which took place in 1928 bringing together representatives of various
political parties and communities in India with a view to working out a mutually
agreed formula for the country's constitutional advance in response to the invitation
of the British government.
On 7 July 1925, Lord Birkenhead, the Secretary of State for India, had, in a
speech in the House of Lords, said : "Let them [the Indians] produce a constitution
which carries behind it a fair measure of general agreement among the great people
of India. Such a contribution to our problems would nowhere be resented. It would,
on the contrary, be most carefully examined by the Government of India, by myself,
and I am sure, by the commission, whenever that body may be assembled. " He
repeated the statement at the time of the constitution, on 8 November 1927, of the
Statutory Commission, better known as Simon Commission. The Indian National
Congress at its annual session at Madrās in December 1927 authorized its Working
Committee to confer with other parties and draft a Swarāj (self-government)
constitution for India which should be placed before the All-Parties Conference to be
held during early 1928. A large number of political parties and social organizations
were invited to take part in the Conference which held its first meeting at Delhi on
12 February 1928. The Central Sikh League received the invitation as representative
of the Sikhs. The League nominated Bābā Khaṛak Siṅgh, Sardār Bahādur Mehtāb
Siṅgh, Master Tārā Siṅgh, Giānī Sher Siṅgh, Amar Siṅgh Jhabāl and Sardār Maṅgal
Siṅgh to take part in the Conference.
Sharp differences on vital questions arose between the Muslim League on the
one hand and the Hindu Mahā Sabhā and the Sikhs on the other during the first
session of the All-Parties Conference held at Delhi on 12 February 1928 under the
presidentship of Dr M. A. Ansārī. At the next session held on 19 May 1928, the
Conference appointed a committee of ten members headed by Paṇḍit Motīlāl Nehrū
to lay down broad principles which should serve as the basis for the new scheme.
Maṅgal Siṅgh represented the Sikhs on the committee. The committee presented on
10 August 1928 a unanimous report known as the Nehrū Committee Report which
was placed for review before the All-Parties Conference at Lucknow on 28-31 August
1928. The Report suggested Dominion Status for India; federal system of
government with a strong centre; responsible executive; bicameral legislature at the
Centre and unicameral ones in the provinces; adult franchise and joint electorates
with reservation of seats proportionate to population for the Muslims in provinces
where they were in a minority and for non-Muslims in the North West Frontier
Province. There were no provisions made specifically for the Sikhs. The
recommendations of the Nehrū Committee, as adopted at the All-Parties Conference
at Lucknow, were to be placed before an All-Parties Convention which met at
Calcutta in December 1928.
Maṅgal Siṅgh the sole Sikh member of the Nehrū Committee had signed the
Report and put the seal of Sikhs' assent on its recommendations. Some other Sikh
Congress leaders such as Sardūl Siṅgh Caveeshar and Amar Siṅgh Jhabāl supported
the stand taken by Maṅgal Siṅgh, but Master Tārā Siṅgh, Giānī Sher Siṅgh and some
other Akālī leaders were strongly opposed. They argued that their demand had been
complete abolition of communal representation not only in the Punjab but all over
the country. If communal representation was to be given to any minority community
in any other province, the same concession should have been given the Sikh

minority in the Punjab as well. The Report was considered at the annual session of
the Central Sikh League at Gujrāṅwālā on 22 October 1928. Giving his presidential
address extempore, Bābā Khaṛak Siṅgh said that the Report had sinned against the
self-respect and dignity of India by limiting the national objective to Dominion
Status. This meant that the people would have to fight twice over - first, to win
Dominion Status and then, Swarāj or complete independence. The second point of
Bābā Khaṛak Siṅgh's criticism was that the Nehrū Report had laid the foundation of
communalism by accepting separate electorates. Giānī Sher Siṅgh sponsored the
main resolution castigating the Report for acquiescing in the principle of communal
representation. The resolution advocated a system of joint electorates with plural
constituencies, adding that, if community-wise representation became inevitable,
Sikhs should have at least 30 per cent of the seats in the Punjab legislature and the
same proportion of representation from the Punjab in the Central legislature. Among
other speakers were Sant Siṅgh of Lyallpur, Amar Siṅgh Jhabāl and Būṭā Siṅgh,
Advocate. Maṅgal Siṅgh, who was a signatory to the Nehrū Report, told the
conference that he had urged upon the committee that either communal
representation be discarded altogether or that Sikhs' share be fixed at 30 per cent.
Master Tārā Siṅgh said that the Sikhs wanted neither British rāj nor Muslim. He
declared that, while working with the Congress, he would not flinch from laying
down his life to secure the Sikhs their rights. The original resolution, disapproving of
the Nehrū Report and its goal of Dominion Status and demanding 30 per cent seats
for the Sikhs in case separate electorates were adopted, was carried by a large
majority.
At the All-Parties Convention held at Calcutta commencing from 22 December
1928, Sikhs were represented by 30 delegates of the Central Sikh League, besides 8
members of the Nāmdhārī sect. Sardār Bahādur Mehtāb Siṅgh, speaking on behalf of
the Sikh League on 29 December 1928, opposed the provision for reservation of
seats in any province, adding that if the principle was to be accepted in the case of
one community it should apply to others as well. At the following session (30
December), an amendment was moved on behalf of the Sikh League to the effect
that communalism should not be made the basis of future policy in India in any
shape or form and that the Nehrū Report be amended accordingly, but it was ruled
out of order by the President, Dr M. A. Ansārī. Harnām Siṅgh read out a long
prepared statement on behalf of the Sikh League, stressing the historical, economic
and political importance of the Sikhs in the Punjab, and how they had been ignored
in the Nehrū scheme. The Sikhs, he said, were prepared to make all sacrifices in the
interest of the nation, provided communalism was completely expunged from the
Indian body politic, but the communal principle was, on the contrary, the basis of
the Nehrū Report. He declared that his party did not support the Report and would
take no further part in the proceedings of the Convention. The delegates
representing the Sikh League walked out of the Convention. Mahātmā Gāndhī while
moving for adjournment of the Convention sine die remarked that personally he felt
that justice had not been done to the Sikhs.
The disappointment of the Sikhs with Nehrū Committee Report and the AllParties Conference drove even some progressive and nationalist sections of the
community away from the Indian National Congress. The Sikh leaders planned a
strategy which forced the Congress leadership not only to shelve the Nehrū
Committee Report for good, but also to come to terms with the Sikhs who held a
conference at Lahore at the end of December 1929 to coincide with the 44th annual

session of the Congress to be held there under the presidentship of Paṇḍit
Jawāharlāl Nehrū. Bābā Khaṛak Siṅgh, who presided over the Sikh conference,
reiterated the Sikhs' determination not to let any single community establish its
hegemony in Punjab. A resolution passed by the conference demanded that, if
communal representation was to continue, the Sikhs should get 30 per cent share of
the assembly seats in Punjab, with adequate provisions for the protection of their
rights in other provinces.
The Sikh conference, and even more dramatically the mammoth Sikh march
that preceded it, made a tremendous impact. Congress leaders led by Mahātmā
Gāndhī came to meet Bābā Khaṛak Siṅgh and his colleagues and gave them the
assurance that no political arrangement which did not give full satisfaction to the
Sikhs would be accepted by the Indian National Congress.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Majumdar, R. C. , ed. , The History and Culture of Indian People, vol. V.
Bombay, 1957
Harbans Singh, The Heritage of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1983
Khushwant Singh, A History of the Sikhs, vol. 2. Princeton, 1966
Gopal Singh, A History of the Sikh People (1969-1978). Delhi, 1979
K. S. Thāpar

ALMAST, BHĀĪ (1553-1643), Sikh preacher and head of a dhūāṅ or branch of the
Udāsī sect, was born in a Gauṛ Brāhmaṇ family of Srīnagar (Kashmīr) on 26 August
1553. He was the son of Bhāī Hardatt and Māī Prabhā, and was the elder brother of
Bālū Hasnā, another equally prominent preacher of the sect. Almast's original name
was Ālū he came to be called Almast (lit. intoxicated, in a state of ecstasy,
indifferent) because of his mystical proclivities and indifference towards worldly
affairs. He was also called Kambalīā or Godaṛīā because he would normally be
dressed only in a ragged blanket (kambal, in Punjabi) or godaṛī, a light quilt or
padded sheet. Young Ālū was hardly past his adolescence when he left home in
quest of spiritual knowledge. In 1574, he came to Ḍerā Bābā Nānak where he fell
under the spell of Bābā Srī Chand, the elder son of Gurū Nānak and founder of the
Udāsī sect. He served at the dehurā or mausoleum of Gurū Nānak, and for his
livelihood tended a flock of goats. It was here that he began to be called Almast.
Bābā Gurdittā (1613-38), the eldest son of Gurū Hargobind, who had succeeded
Bābā Srī Chand as head of the Udāsī sect, deputed Bhāī Almast to preach the
message of Gurū Nānak in the eastern provinces. He first went to Puri in Oṛissā
where he established a shrine to commemorate Gurū Nānak's visit to the Jagannāth
temple. The shrine, known as Gurdwārā Maṅgū Maṭh, is still in existence.
In 1633, Bhāī Almast went to Nānak Matā formerly known as Gorakh Matā,
where Gurū Nānak had a discourse with the Nāth yogīs under an old pīpal tree, and
where a shrine dedicated to him had later been established. The place had been
reoccupied by the yogīs who had razed the Sikh shrine and burnt down the pīpal
tree. Almast applied for help to Gurū Hargobind who reached Nānak Matā in June
1634, chastised the Nāth intruders and restored the Sikh shrine. According to local
tradition, he even miraculously rejuvenated the burnt pīpal tree. Bhāī Almast spent
the remaining period of his life at Nānak Matā from where he sent out his eight
principal disciples to preach in various districts of eastern India. These disciples
established Sikh shrines at places visited by Gurū Nānak during his first udāsī or
absence from home on a preaching journey.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Randhīr Siṅgh, Bhāī, Udāsī Sikhāṅ dī Vithiā. Chandigarh, 1972
Prītam Siṅgh, ed. , Nirmal SampradāiAmritsar, 1981
Piārā Siṅgh Padam

ĀLO HARAKH, village in Saṅgrūr district, has a historical shrine called Gurdwārā
Sāhib Alo Harakh Pātshāhī Naumī. A low domed Mañjī Sāhib, under an old banyan
tree marks the site where Gurū Tegh Bahādur once sat arriving from the
neighbouring village of Guṇīke. The congregation hall has a vaulting ceiling with a
domed sanctum inside. Both the hall and the Mañjī Sāhib were constructed in 1909.
The Gurdwārā is administered by the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak
Committee through a local committee. Large congregations are held on full moon
day and on major anniversaries on the Sikh calendar.
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

ĀLSŪN, an obscure village in Himāchal Pradesh, is alluded to in Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's
Bachitra Nāṭak, canto IX, verse 24, as the site of a brief skirmish when the Gurū was
on his way back to Anandpur after the battle of Nadauṇ (March 1690). According to
Sikh chroniclers, the Rājpūts of Ālsūn were the subjects of Rājā Bhīm Chand of
Kahlūr and were therefore inimical towards Gurū Gobind Siṅgh. They did not
welcome the Gurū and his Sikhs and were chastised by Dīwān Nand Chand under
orders from the Gurū.
The village of Ālsūn is no longer extant. A modern researcher, Nariñjan Siṅgh
Sāthī, has identified the site as present-day village of Samālṛā, in Baṅgāṇā subdivision of Ūnā district, on the basis of local tradition. It is six kilometers from
Baṅgāṇā on the road to Ūnā.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Bachitra Nāṭak.

Kāhn Siṅgh, Bhāī, Gurushabad Ratnākar Mahāṅ Kosh. Patiala, 1974
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

ALVARINE, an Italian (Irishman, according to C. Grey's European Adventurers of
Northern India), who joined service under the Sikh Darbār in 1841. He died at
Lahore soon afterwards.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Grey, C. , European Adventurers of Northern India [Reprint]. Patiala, 1970
Gulcharan Siṅgh

AMAR DĀS, GURŪ (1479-1574), the third of the ten Gurūs of the Sikh faith, was
born into a Bhallā Khatrī family on Baisākh sudī 14, 1536 Bk, corresponding to 5 May
1479, at Bāsarke, a village in present-day Amritsar district of the Punjab. His father's
name was Tej Bhān and mother's Bakht Kaur; the latter has also been called by
chroniclers variously as Lachchhamī, Bhūp Kaur and Rūp Kaur. He was married on
11 Māgh 1559 Bk to Mansā Devī, daughter of Devī Chand, a Bahil Khatrī, of the
village of Sankhatrā, in Siālkoṭ district, and had four children - two sons, Mohrī and
Mohan, and two daughters, Dānī and Bhānī.
Amar Dās had a deeply religious bent of mind. As he grew in years, he was
drawn towards the Vaiṣṇava faith and made regular pilgrimages to Haridvār.
Chroniclers record twenty such trips. Amar Dās might have continued the series, but
for certain happenings in the course of the twentieth journey which radically
changed the course of his life. On the return journey this time, he fell in with a
sādhū who chided him for not owning a gurū or spiritual preceptor. Amar Dās vowed
that he must have one and his pledge was soon redeemed when he was escorted in
1597 Bk/AD 1540 by Bībī Amaro, a daughter-in-law of the family, to the presence of
her father, Gurū Aṅgad, at Khaḍūr, not far from his native place. He immediately
became a disciple and spent twelve years serving Gurū Aṅgad with single-minded
devotion. He rose three hours before daybreak to fetch water from the river for the
Gurū's bath. During the day he worked in the community kitchen, helping with
cooking and serving meals and with cleansing the utensils. When free from these
tasks, he went out to collect firewood from the nearby forest for Gurū kā Laṅgar. His
mornings and evenings were spent in prayer and meditation.
Several anecdotes showing Amar Dās's total dedication to his preceptor have
come down the generations. The most crucial one relates how on one stormy night,
he, braving fierce wind, rain and lightning, brought water from the River Beās for
the Gurū. Passing through a weaver's colony just outside Khaḍūr, he stumbled
against a peg and fell down sustaining injuries, but did not let the water pitcher slip
from his head. One of the weaver women, disturbed in her sleep, disparagingly
called him Amarū Nithāvān' (Amarū the homeless). As the incident was reported to
Gurū Aṅgad, he praised Amar Dās's devotion and described him as "the home of the
homeless, " adding that he was "the honour of the unhonoured, the strength of the
weak, the support of the supportless, the shelter of the unsheltered, the protector of
the unprotected, the restorer of what is lost, the emancipator of the captive. " This
also decided Gurū Aṅgad's mind on the issue of the selection of a successor. The
choice inevitably fell on Amar Dās. Gurū Aṅgad paid obeisance to him by making the
customary offerings of a coconut and five pice. He had the revered Bhāī Buḍḍhā
apply the tilak or mark of investiture to his forehead, thus installing him as the
future Gurū. Soon afterwards, on the fourth day of the light half of the month of
Chet in Bikramī year 1609 (29 March 1552), Gurū Aṅgad passed away.
Gurū Amar Dās made Goindvāl his headquarters. He was one of the builders of
the town and had constructed there a house for his family as well. Goindvāl lay on
the main road connecting Delhi and Lahore, at the head of one of the most
important ferries on the River Beās. From there Gurū Amar Dās continued preaching
the word of Gurū Nānak Dev. In his hands the Sikh faith was further consolidated.
He created a well-knit ecclesiastical system and set up twenty-two mañjīs (dioceses
or preaching districts), covering different parts of India. Each was placed under the
charge of a pious Sikh, who, besides disseminating the Gurū's message, looked after

the saṅgatwithin his jurisdiction and transmitted the disciples' offerings to Goindvāl.
Gurū Amar Dās appointed the opening days of the months of Baisākh and Māgh as
well as the Dīvālī for the Sikhs to forgather at Goindvāl where he also had a bāolī
well with steps descending to water level, built and which in due course became a
pilgrim centre. A new centre was planned for where Amritsar was later founded by
his successor, Gurū Rām Dās. He laid down for Sikhs simple ceremonies and rites for
birth, marriage and death. The Gurū's advice, according to Sarūp Dās Bhallā,
Mahimā Prakāsh, to his Sikhs as to how they must conduct themselves in their daily
life was : "He who firmly grasps the Gurū's word is my beloved Sikh. He should rise
a watch before dawn, make his ablutions and sit in seclusion. The Gurū's image he
should implant in his heart, and contemplate on gurbāṇī. He should keep his mind
and consciousness firmly in control. He should never utter a falsehood, nor indulge
in slander. He should make an honest living and be prepared always to serve holy
men. He must not covet another's woman or wealth. He should not eat unless
hungry, nor sleep unless tired. He who breaks this principle falls a victim to sloth. His
span is shortened and he lives in suffering. My Sikh should shun those who feign as
women to worship the Lord. He should seek instead the company of pious men.
Thus will he shed ignorance. Thus will he adhere to holy devotion. "
From Goindvāl, Gurū Amar Dās made a few short trips in the area around to
propagate Gurū Nānak's teaching. According to the Mahimā Prakāsh, "The Gurū
went to all the places of pilgrimage and made them holy. He conferred favour on his
Sikhs by letting them have a sight of him. He planted the seed of God's love in their
hearts. He spread light in the world and ejected darkness. " Liberation of the people
was also cited by Gurū Rām Dās, Nānak IV, as the purpose of pilgrimage undertaken
by his predecessor. According to his hymns in the Gurū Granth Sāhib, Gurū Amar
Dās visited Kurukshetra at the time of abhijit nakṣatra. This, by astronomical
calculations made by a modern scholar, fell on 14 January 1553. This is the one date
authentically abstracted from the Gurū Granth Sāhib, which otherwise scarcely
contains passages alluding to any historical events and this date is also one of the
fewest so precisely known about the life of Gurū Amar Dās.
Gurū kā Laṅgar became still more renowned in Gurū Amar Dās's time. The
Gurū expected every visitor to partake of food in it before seeing him. By this he
meant to minimize the distinctions of caste and rank. Emperor Akbar, who once
visited him at Goindvāl, is said to have eaten in the refectory like any other pilgrim.
The food in the laṅgar was usually of a rich Punjabi variety. Gurū Amar Dās himself,
however, lived on coarse bread earned by his own labour. Whatever was received in
the kitchen during the day was used by night and nothing was saved for the
morrow.
Gurū Amar Dās gave special attention to the amelioration of the position of
women. The removal of the disadvantages to which they had been subject became
an urgent concern. He assigned women to the responsibility of supervising the
communities of disciples in certain sectors. The customs of purdah and sati were
discouraged.
The bāṇī, the Gurū's revealed word, continued to be a precious endowment.
Gurū Amar Dās collected the compositions of his predecessors and of some of the
bhaktas of that time. When he had recorded these in pothīs--two of them preserved

in the descendant families to this day--an important step towards the codification of
the canon had been taken.
Like his predecessors, Gurū Amar Dās wrote verse in Punjabi. His compositions
which express deep spiritual experience are preserved in the Gurū Granth Sāhib.
They are in number next only to those of Gurū Nānak and Gurū Arjan, Nānak V.
Gurū Amar Dās composed poetry in seventeen different musical measures or rāgas,
namely Sirī, Mājh, Gauṛī, Āsā, Gūjarī, Vaḍahaṅs, Soraṭh, Dhanāsarī, Sūhī, Bilāval,
Rāmkalī, Mārū, Bhairau, Basant, Sāraṅg, Malār, and Prabhātī. In terms of poetic
forms, he composedpadās(quartets),chhants(lyrics), aṣṭpadīs (octets), ślokas
(couplets) and vārs (ballads). Best known among his compositions is theAnandu.
Gurū Amar Dās's poetry is simple in style, free from linguistic or structural intricacies.
Metaphors and figures of speech are homely, and images and similes are taken from
everyday life or from the popular Puranic tradition. The general tenor is philosophical
and didactic.
Before his death on Bhādoṅsudi15, 1631 Bk/1 September 1574, Gurū Amar
Dās chose Bhāī Jeṭhā, his son-in-law, as his spiritual successor. Bhāī Jeṭhā became
Gurū Rām Dās, the Fourth Gurū of the Sikhs.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Bhallā, Sarūp Dās, Mahimā Prakāsh. Patiala, 1971.
Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Panth Prakāsh [Reprint]. Patiala, 1970
Satibīr Siṅgh, Parbatu Merāṇ. Jalandhar, 1983
Macauliffe, Max Arthur, The Sikh Religion. Oxford, 1909
Jodh Singh, Life of Guru Amar Das. Amritsar, 1949
Ranjit Singh, Guru Amar Das ji. Amritsar, 1980
Fauja Singh and Rattan Singh Jaggi, eds. , Perspectives on Guru Amar Das.
Patiala, 1982
Piārā Siṅgh Padam

AMAR KATHĀ, of unknown authorship, comprises a mixture of diverse hagiographic
traditions bearing on the life of Gurū Nānak. The work remains unpublished, but
several manuscripts are known to exist : for instance, two of them, dated AD 1818
and 1872, respectively, are preserved in the Gurū Nānak Dev University Library at
Amritsar, one, dated 1877, in the Punjabi University Museum, Paṭiālā, one, dated
1870, at the Pañjābī Sāhitya Academy, Ludhiāṇā and one, dated 1825, in the Sikh
Reference Library until it perished in the Army attack in 1984. Compiled probably
towards the end of the eighteenth century, Amar Kathā draws upon all the prevalent
janam sākhī cycles such as Purātan, Miharbān and Bālā along with the interpolations
introduced by the Handālīās (q. v. ). This miscellany narrates Gurū Nānak's life in
terms of the usual legend, myth and miracle. It begins with the customary
invocatory passages seeking immortality for the reader as well as for the listener.
These are followed by the first cluster of about seven (in some manuscripts split into
twelve) sākhīs. Opening with an account of the genesis of the Universe, this section
tells us how Nirañjan Niraṅkār, the Immaculate Formless One, remained in a
nebulous state for full 144 aeons; how He, then, created by His will māyā, followed
by the creation of various gods and goddesses. It was through gods Viṣṇu, Brahmā
and Śiva that human beings were created. Then Niraṅkār ordained Bābā Nānak (who
is none other than Niraṅkār's manifest facet) to retrieve the four Vedas for the
benefit of mankind. Here follows the account of the four aeons detailing their salient
features and enlisting the incarnations of Niraṅkār each aeon had witnessed. This
section ends with Gurū Nānak's advent in the dark age, to show mankind the way to
liberation.
The following section on Janampatrī is extension of the Bālā tradition. The date
of the Gurū's birth given here is the full moon day of the month of kārtik in 1526
Bk/AD 1469 - an example of the compiler following the Bālā tradition which has been
used as the broad framework into which anecdotes and accounts picked from other
current sources have been fitted. Then there are sākhīs reiterating the significance
of surrender to the Gurū's will and of the company of the holy in realizing the
Supreme Being. A few of the sākhīs attempt to explain some of the sayings of Gurū
Nānak. Some are purely folkloristic in character containing fragments from old
ballads sung by minstrels to extol Gurū Nānak. Since most of the sākhīs comprising
this work have been lifted from different traditions, the change in idiom and style
becomes apparent with change in the source from where a particular sākhī is picked.
Piār Siṅgh

AMAR PAD or amarāpad, also called parampada(highest step), turiāpadaor
turiāvasthā, is the stage of deathlessness or immortality . In the Gurū Granth Sāhib
the term has been used for the highest stage of spiritual enlightenment which is also
the highest state of self-realization, equivalent of God-realization. This is the stage of
ultimate release.

See MUKTI and JĪVAN-MUKT
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AMAR SIDDHŪ, village 13 km southeast of Lahore along the Lahore-Kasūr road, is
sacred to Gurū Hargobind (1595-1644), who once visited here travelling from Gurū
Māṅgaṭ close to Lahore. Gurdwārā Pātshāhi VI, established to commemorate the
visit, was outside the village to the east of it. The building, constructed by Rāi
Bahādur Sir Gaṅgā Rām in 1922, was a domed structure in the middle of a small
garden. The Gurdwārā was affiliated to the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak
Committee and was administered by the local managing committee of Lahore city.
The shrine was abandoned at the time of mass migrations caused by the partition of
the Punjab in 1947.
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AMAR SIṄGH (1888-1948), of the Sher-i-Punjab, journalist, scholar and a prominent
figure in Sikh politics, was born on 27 May 1888 at Piṇḍī Gheb in Attock district of
the Punjab, now in Pakistan. His grandfather, Gauhar Siṅgh, had held a civil
appointment under Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh. He spent his childhood and received
education in Urdu and Persian in Jammū and Kashmīr where his father, Gulāb Siṅgh,
was an employee of the ruler, Mahārājā Pratāp Siṅgh. After his father's death, the
family settled in Rāwalpiṇḍī where Amar Siṅgh ran a shop for some time before he
adopted journalism as his profession. He launched the Lyall Gazette, a weekly in
Urdu, under the patronage of the Chief Khālsā Dīwān whose point of view on
political, religious and social issues he supported and discussed in his writings. He
gradually turned away from the moderate policies of the Dīwān, and identified
himself with the more radical politics of Bābā Khaṛak Siṅgh. In 1921, he renamed his
paper Sher-i-Punjab ("Lion of the Punjab") which title became an epithet popularly
added to his name. The paper still continues to be issued under this name, since the
partition of the Punjab, from Delhi.
Besides journalism, Amar Siṅgh was active in civic and political affairs. He was
a member of the municipal committee, Lahore, for 16 years. He was virtually a
permanent president of Siṅgh Sabhā, Lahore, and of the managing board of the
local historical Sikh shrines. In 1921, he was made a member of the Shiromaṇī
Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee and, during the Jaito morchā or agitation, he was
arrested (7 January 1924) and sentenced to two years' rigorous imprisonment. He
was elected to the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee under the Sikh
Gurdwaras Act in 1926 and 1930. During subsequent elections in 1933, 1936 and
1939 (the last in the series till after Independence), he came in as a co-opted
member. When in 1934 Bābā Khaṛak Siṅgh dissociated himself from the Shiromaṇī
Akālī Dal and set up his own Central Akālī Dal, Amar Siṅgh was chosen to be the
senior vice-president of the new party. In 1947, Amar Siṅgh migrated to Delhi. He
died at Kasaulī on 9 July 1948.
Amar Siṅgh wielded a powerful pen. He was an acknowledged master of Urdu
prose, and he employed the talent to devastating effect in political and religious
polemics. His humorous column Argaṛā, written under a pseudonym, "Risāldār
Major, " mixing anecdote, wit and satire, was very popular in contemporary Urdu
journalism. Amar Siṅgh also composed verse in Punjabi, Urdu and Persian. He
translated Omar Khayām's Rubāiyāt into Punjabi verse. He also wrote two novels
and several short stories in Urdu. He was as accomplished a speaker as he was a
writer, and frequently addressed Sikh assemblies on religious and political issues.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Harbans Singh, The Heritage of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1983
Jaṅg Bahādur Siṅgh

AMAR SIṄGH (1888-1962), who came into prominence in the Gurdwārā Reform
movement, was the eldest of the three sons of Gopāl Siṅgh of the village of Jhabāl,
in Amritsar district of the Punjab. His great-grandfather, Gulāb Siṅgh, had served in
the army of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh and his grandfather, Harbhagat Siṅgh had been
an aide-de-camp to Kaṅvar Nau Nihāl Siṅgh. Born in 1888, Amar Siṅgh was
educated at the village school and at Khālsā Collegiate School, Amritsar. After
passing the matriculation examination, he joined the police department and became
a sub-inspector. Once as he saw police officials snatch away kirpāns from some
Sikhs, he protested and told the superintendent of police that dispossessing a Sikh of
his kirpānmeant violating his religious freedom. Demolition by the British of a portion
of the outer wall of Gurdwārā Rikābgañj in Delhi, ban on the wearing of kirpān by
Sikhs and incidents such as the Budge Budge firing led Amar Siṅgh to resign his
appointment in the police. He got started on a political career by organizing and
addressing, in association with Dān Siṅgh Vachhoā, a series of public meetings in his
own village and in the neighbourhood. He defied orders of the deputy commissioner
of Amritsar banning the meeting to be convened at Mañjī Sāhib, close to the Golden
Temple, to protest against a robe of honour having been conferred by the manager
of the Darbār Sāhib on General Dyer, who had ordered the firing in Jalliāṅvālā Bāgh.
The meeting did take place and resolutions castigating the deputy commissioner as
well as the manager were adopted.
Following a public appeal by Sardūl Siṅgh Caveeshar for volunteers for a
Shahīdī Jathā or martyrs' band to march to Delhi on 1 December 1920 to rebuild the
Gurdwārā Rikābgañj boundary wall demolished by the British, Amar Siṅgh and his
brother, Jaswant Siṅgh, made a hurricane tour of the Punjab addressing meetings
and enlisting names. At one such meeting during the Amāvas fair at Tarn Tāran
under the auspices of the Central Mājhā Khālsā Dīwān complaints were received
about the mismanagement of Gurdwārā Bābe dī Ber at Siālkoṭ. Amar Siṅgh was
deputed to visit the shrine and make a report. He was joined there by his brother,
Jaswant Siṅgh, and by Tejā Siṅgh of Bhuchchar and Kartār Siṅgh of Jhabbar with
their bands of volunteers. The government yielded to public pressure and the
management of the Gurdwārā was handed over to a committee of selected Sikhs on
6 October 1920. Henceforth the Jhabāl brothers were recognized as a force in Sikh
affairs. When the control of the Akāl Takht was taken over by the Sikhs and
Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee formed on 16 November 1920, both of
them and their third brother, Sarmukh Siṅgh, were included in it as members. Amar
Siṅgh was nominated a member of the provisional committee to manage the Tarn
Tāran Gurdwārā after it had been taken over from the priests by the reformists. He
took a leading part in assuming possession of gurdwārās at Oṭhīāṅ, Tejā Kalāṅ,
Chomālā Sāhib, Pañja Sāhib, Peshāwar, Ramdās and Jhabāl. For a public speech he
delivered after the Nankāṇā Sāhib tragedy, he was arrested and imprisoned for six
months.
Amar Siṅgh presided over the third annual session of the Sikh League held at
Lyallpur in 1922. He participated in the non-cooperation movement launched by the
Indian National Congress as well as in the Akālī morchās for the reformation of the
gurdwārās. On 16 July 1922, he was elected vice-president of the Shiromaṇī
Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee. He suffered imprisonment again for making
seditious speeches at the time of the morchā for securing release from the British of
the keys of the Golden Temple toshākhānā. After the Sikh Gurdwaras Act was
passed, Amar Siṅgh drifted more towards the Congress and remained for some time

president of the Punjab Provincial Congress Committee. He died on 28 March 1962
at the village of Dayāl Bhaṛaṅg, in Ajnālā tahsīl of Amritsar district, where he had
been allotted lands after the partition of the Punjab (1947).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Pratāp Siṅgh, Giānī, Gurdwārā Sudhār arthāt Akālī Lahir. Amritsar, 1975.
Josh, Sohan Siṅgh, Akālī Morchiāṅ dā Itihās. Delhi, 1972.
Harbans Singh, The Heritage of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1983.
Ganda Singh, ed. , Some Confidential Papers of the Akali Movement. Amritsar,
1965.
Sahni, Ruchi Ram, Struggle for Reform in Sikh Shrines. Ed. Ganda Singh.
Amritsar, n. d.
Jagjīt Siṅgh

AMAR SIṄGH MAJĪṬHĪĀ, soldier and administrator in Sikh times, called Amar Siṅgh
Kalāṅ (senior) to distinguish him from his namesake Amar Siṅgh Khurd (junior) who
was also from the village of Majīṭhā, was the son of Dargāhā Siṅgh Majīṭhīā. He took
part in many an early campaign under Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh. When Dīwān Rām Diāl
was killed in Hazārā in 1820, Amar Siṅgh was appointed governor of that country.
While engaged in curbing the activities of the turbulent and unruly Afghān tribes, he
was killed treacherously in an ambush. Amar Siṅgh was a fine bowman and the local
tribesmen still point to a large tree pierced through and through by an arrow which,
they say, came from the bow of Amar Siṅgh.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Sūrī, Sohan Lāl, 'Umdāt-ut-Twārīkh. Lahore, 1885-89.
Griffin Lepel, and C. F. Massy, Chiefs and Families of Note in the Punjab.
Lahore, 1909.
B. J. Hasrat

AMAR SIṄGH MAJĪṬHĪĀ (d. 1848), known as Amar Siṅgh Khurd (junior) to
distinguish him from his namesake Amar Siṅgh Kalāṅ (senior) who was also from the
village of Majīṭhā, son of Māhṇā Siṅgh (d. 1802), was a jāgīrdār and military
commander under Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh. He was placed in the Ḍerā Khās, a
regiment of irregular cavalry composed of the sons of the Sikh nobility. The young
Amar Siṅgh distinguished himself in the siege of Multān in 1818 and in the Kashmīr
campaign the following year. In 1834, he accompanied the army under Prince Nau
Nihāl Siṅgh and General Harī Siṅgh Nalvā to Peshāwar when the province was
formally annexed to the Sikh kingdom. He was employed on outpost duty in this
campaign and he had many a fierce encounter with the Afghāns. At Shabqadar, he
was wounded by a musket-ball in a night attack made by the Afghāns in force, but
he rallied his men and drove them back. He fought with distinction in the battle of
Jamrūd (30 April 1837). Being a celebrated marksman, he was chosen in 1846 to
instruct the young Mahārājā Duleep Siṅgh in shooting. In the year following, he left
the Punjab on a pilgrimage to Haridvār, and died there in 1848.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Sūrī, Sohan Lāl, 'Umdāt-ut-Twārīkh. Lahore, 1885-89
Griffin, Lepel, and C. F. Massy, Chiefs and Families of Note in the Punjab.
Lahore, 1909,
Bhagat Singh, Maharaja Raṇjit Singh and His Times. Delhi, 1990
Sardār Siṅgh Bhāṭīā

AMAR SIṄGH MĀN (d. 1805), landowner in Amritsar district who left his village about
the year 1759, adopted the Sikh faith and joined the Kanhaiyā Misl. He overran and
took possession of a large part of Gurdāspur district, including Sukālgaṛh and
Dharamkoṭ. He built a fort at Sukālgaṛh which he made his main residence. After a
lifelong fighting career, he died quietly in his bed in the year 1805.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Griffin, Lepel, and C. F. Massy, Chiefs and Families of Note in the Punjab. Lahore,
1909
G. S. Nayyar

AMAR SIṄGH, RĀJĀ (1748-1782), of Paṭiālā, was born on 6 June 1748, the son of
Sardūl Siṅgh and Rāṇī Hukmāṅ. In 1765, he succeeded his grandfather, Ālā Siṅgh,
who had no son living at the time of his death. His succession to the throne of
Paṭiālā was challenged by his step-brother, Himmat Siṅgh, who seized a major
portion of the town of Paṭiālā and the neighbouring area. Amar Siṅgh secured the
eviction of Himmat Siṅgh through the help of the chiefs of Jīnd, Nābhā and Kaithal.
In 1766, he captured Pāyal and Īsṛū from the Koṭlā Afghāns with the help of transSutlej Sikhs under Jassā Siṅgh Āhlūvālīā, from whom he had received the rites of
Khālsā baptism. Pāyal was annexed to Paṭiālā state, while Īsṛū was given to Jassā
Siṅgh Āhlūvālīā.
Ahmad Shāh Durrānī's invasion of the country in 1767 proved very beneficial to
the rising power of Amar Siṅgh, who sent his vakīls to the Shāh with presents. The
Shāh summoned Amar Siṅgh and granted him the sūbahdārī (governorship) of
Sirhind with the title of Rājā-i-Rājgān. He was also given a flag and a drum as
insignia of absolute authority. He paid a lakh of rupees to the Shāh to secure the
release of several thousand Hindus taken captive in the vicinity of Mathurā and
Sahāranpur. He issued coins in the name of Ahmad Shāh.
In 1768, Amar Siṅgh marched against, Gharīb Dās of Manī Mājrā who, after
the death of Ālā Siṅgh, had captured the fort and district of Piñjore. Amar Siṅgh,
helped by the hill rulers of Hiṇḍūr, Kahlūr and Nāhan, defeated Gharīb Dās and
captured the Piñjore fort. Gharīb Dās was, however, not fully reduced to submission.
Rājā Amar Siṅgh marched against him again in 1778. Gharīb Dās paid a large sum of
money to the Paṭiālā chief and retained control of his territory.
Amar Siṅgh next attacked the fort of Koṭ kapūrā, killing Jodh Siṅgh, the local
chief, in the battle. In 1771, he occupied the district of Baṭhiṇḍā subduing Sukhchain
Siṅgh to whom the Fort of Gobindgaṛh, commanding the town, belonged. Three
years later, he reduced Saifābād, a strong fort 7 km to the north-east of Paṭiālā. In
1774, he occupied the Bhaṭṭī country lying south of Paṭiālā. Fatehābād, Sirsā and the
fort of Raṇīā now passed into his hands. In 1777, he again overran Farīdkoṭ and Koṭ
Kapūrā but did not attempt to annex them. In 1779, he frustrated the designs of
Abdul 'Ahad Khān against Sikh territories in the Mālvā. He received help from Jassā
Siṅgh Āhlūvālīā, Jassā Siṅgh Rāmgaṛhīā, Tārā Siṅgh Ghaibā and Jodh Siṅgh, of
Wazīrābād, and repulsed the Mughal expedition at the village of Ghuṛām. By his
extensive conquests and by the shrewd political alliances he made with the rulers of
Nāhan and Bīkāner and with the Misldār sardārs, Amar Siṅgh had made Paṭiālā the
most powerful state between the Yamunā and the Sutlej.
Rājā Amar Siṅgh died at Paṭiālā on 5 February 1782 in the prime of his youth.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Griffin, Lepel, The Rajas of the Punjab. Delhi, 1977.
Kirpal Singh, Maharaja Ala Singh of Patiala and His Times. Amritsar, 1954.
Kirpāl Siṅgh

AMAR SIṄGH THĀPĀ, Nepalese general, was the son of Bhīm Sen Thāpā, the prime
minister of Nepal. In 1794, he conquered Kumāoṅ and began extending Gurkhā
dominions westwards. He subdued the Gaṛhvāl state lying between the Gaṅga and
the Yamunā. In 1805 he crossed the River Yamunā and overran most of the Shimlā
hill states lying between the Yamunā and the Sutlej. The Rājā of Bilāspur solicited
Amar Siṅgh's help against Saṅsār Chand, establishing his authority over the Kāṅgṛā
hills. On hearing the news of Amar Siṅgh's advance, Saṅsār Chand raised the siege
of Bilāspur and retired. Amar Siṅgh crossed the rivers Sutlej and Beās unopposed
and defeated Saṅsār Chand at Mahal Morīāṅ in May 1806. He then laid siege to the
Kāṅgṛā Fort. The Rājā sought the help of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh who drove away the
Gurkhās but himself occupied the Fort. Amar Siṅgh established himself at Arkī, near
Shimlā, and made overtures to the British soliciting their support against Raṇjīt
Siṅgh. They rejected the proposal. During the Gurkhā war of 1814-16, Amar Siṅgh in
vain asked for Raṇjīt Siṅgh's help against the British. There being no response from
the Mahārājā, Amar Siṅgh surrendered to the British who allowed him to retire
unmolested to Nepal.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Sūrī, Sohan Lāl, 'Umdāt ut-Twārīkh. Lahore, 1885-89
Griffin, Lepel, Ranjit Singh. Delhi, 1957
Harbans Singh, The Heritage of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1983
Harī Rām Gupta

AMAR SIṄGH WĀSŪ (1884 1932), Akālī activist and journalist, was born Gaṅga Rām
at the village of Wāsū, in Gujrāt district, now in Pakistan, in 1884, the son of Ladhā
Mall and Lachhmī Devī. Under the influence of the Siṅgh Sabhā movement, the
family went through the Sikh initiatory rites, Gaṅgā Rām becoming Amar Siṅgh
Khālsā and his father Rām Siṅgh. Amar Siṅgh matriculated from the Mission High
School, Gujrāṅwālā, and joined in 1902 the Khālsā College at Amritsar, passing the
intermediate examination of the Pañjāb University, Lahore, in 1904. In 1906, he
went to the United States to train as a journalist, returning to India in 1908. He had
vowed not to take up government service under the British. In partnership with the
historian Karam Siṅgh, he set up an Ayurvedic pharmacy--the Sannyāsī Āshram--at
Sargodhā in 1908. While at Sargodhā, Amar Siṅgh married Rām Kaur, daughter of
Bhāī Naraiṇ Siṅgh, of Ghaṛūāṅ, a village in Paṭiālā district. It was an inter-caste
marriage encouraged by Siṅgh Sabhā enthusiasts but opposed by the orthodox.
When Bhāī Jodh Siṅgh, theologian and educationist, formed in 1909 a group of Jīvan
Sevaks or those dedicating their lives to the service of the Sikh community, Amar
Siṅgh was amongst the few who volunteered to join the new society and work for it
on a small fixed honorarium for twenty years. In 1920, Amar Siṅgh, now known as
Amar Siṅgh Wāsū after the name of his village, became editor of the English weekly,
the Khalsa Advocate, started by the Chief Khālsā Dīwān. When this paper closed
down, he took over as assistant secretary of the Chief Khālsā Dīwān. As the
reformist Sikhs assumed charge of the Nankāṇā shrines after the massacre of 1921,
Amar Siṅgh was appointed to administer them. At the time of Gurū kā Bāgh morchā,
he was shifted to Amritsar. From 1927-30 he remained a member of the Shiromaṇī
Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee.
Amar Siṅgh died at Sargodhā on 27 June 1932 after a prolonged illness.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Ashok, Shamsher Siṅgh Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee dā
Pañjāh SālāItihās Amritsar, 1982
Sahni, Ruchi Ram, Struggle for Reform in Sikh Shrines. Amritsar, n. d.
Sarmukh Siṅgh Amole

AMARGAṚH, village 3 km east of Goniāṇā Maṇḍī (30º-18'N, 74º-54'E) in Baṭhiṇḍā
district of the Punjab, has an old shrine, Gurdwārā Vidyāsar Pātshāhī Satviṅ,
dedicated to Gurū Har Rāi (1630-61) who, according to local tradition, visited the
site during his stay at Bhokhaṛī, since renamed Har Rāipur. Amargaṛh was then
called Jhabluṭṭi. The shrine was looked after by a line of Udāsī priests until the early
20th century. The present building of the Gurdwārā, constructed in 1912, comprises
a dīvān hall with a verandah on three sides. The Gurdwārā is managed by a
committee of the local saṅgat.
Jagjīt Siṅgh

AMARNĀMĀ, a Persian work comprising 146 verses composed in AD 1708 by Bhāī
Natth Mall, a ḍhāḍī or balladeer who lived from the time of Gurū Hargobind to that
of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, Nānak X. The manuscript of the work in Gurmukhī script
obtained from Bhāī Fattā, ninth in descent from Bhāī Natth Mall, through Giānī
Gurdit Siṅgh, then editor of the Punjabi daily, the Prakāsh, Paṭiālā, was edited by Dr
Gaṇḍā Siṅgh and published by Sikh History Society, Amritsar/ Paṭiālā in 1953.
The Amarnāmā opens with the words "ath Amarnāmā taṭ Godāvarī Srī
Mukhvāk Pātshāhī 10" (This Amarnāmā was written on the bank of the River
Godāvarī by the Tenth Lord, Gurū Gobind Siṅgh) and ends with the words "iti Srī
Amarnāmā Mukhvāk Pātshāhī Dasam sati sampūran" (Thus this Amarnāmā of the

Tenth Master was completed). In spite of these statements and in spite of the fact
that the author at places uses the first person and directs the Sikhs, as Gurū, to
follow certain rules of conduct, the work clearly is not the composition of Gurū
Gobind Siṅgh but that of a poet who, with a view to imparting authenticity to it,
attributed it to the Gurū. It seems that Natth Mall and his son had accompanied
Gurū Gobind Siṅgh to the Deccan and entertained Sikhs at the afternoon assemblies
reciting heroic poetry. From events narrated in the Amarnāmā it can easily be
surmised that the author was an eye-witness to most of them.

The Amarnāmā is not a work of any high literary merit. The author, a Punjabi,
possessed very little knowledge of Persian and his verse is desultory. However, it is
historically very valuable, not only because it is a composition coming from one of
Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's contemporaries and his companions but also because the
author had personal knowledge of the events described in it. The work briefly refers
to Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's meeting with Bandā on 3 September 1708, on the occasion
of the solar eclipse, the fighting between the Sikhs and Bandā's men, the lodging of
complaints by Hindus against the Gurū before Emperor Bahādur Shāh, Bhāī Nand
Lāl's presence in the Emperor's camp at Nāndeḍ, the Gurū's generous and lavish
distribution of charity among the needy, and the dispatch of Bandā Siṅgh with five
Sikhs to the Punjab. Among Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's precepts recorded in the text,
primacy attaches to Sikhs receiving the rites of amrit, i. e. baptism of the double
edged sword, disregarding Brāhmaṇical counsel (127-28). They must at all stages of
their life, in childhood and in youth and before the end comes, seek to remain
baptized (142-44). Animals must not be slaughtered in the Muslim way of halāl
(132). As Sikhs engage in amusement and festivity, they must in the afternoon listen
to bards reciting ballads (135).
Bhagat Siṅgh

AMARNĀTH, DĪWĀN (1822-1867), bakhshī or paymaster of the irregular forces of
the Sikh army who distinguished himself also as a historian, was born in 1822 the
son of Rājā Dīnā Nāth, finance minister of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh. During the prime
ministership of Hīrā Siṅgh, Amar Nāth was assigned to the task of settling the
accounts of government studs and stables. The town duties of Lahore and Amritsar
were also leased out through him. Hīrā Siṅgh reposed great trust in Amar Nāth who
became an intermediary between him and his uncle, Rājā Gulāb Siṅgh, when the
two had fallen out. Owing to strained relations with his father, Amar Nāth had to
quit his government post during the first Anglo-Sikh war. But, being a man of letters,
he continued enjoying an annual pension of 1, 200 rupees, which was raised to 4,
000 rupees after the death of his father in 1857. Besides some poetry, Amar Nāth
wrote the Zafar Nāmah-i-Raṇjīt Siṅgh , a chronicle, in Persian, of the reign of
Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh up to 1835-36. The work was edited by Sītā Rām Kohlī and
published in 1928.

jāgīr.

Amar Nāth died in 1867, his elder son, Dīwān Rām Nāth, succeeding him in his
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1.
2.
3.
4.

Sūrī, Sohan Lāl, 'Umdāt-ut-Twārīkh. Lahore, 1885-89
Griffin, Lepel, Ranjit Singh. Delhi, 1957
Gupta, Hari Ram, Panjab on the Eve of First Sikh War. Chandigarh, 1956
Khushwant Singh, Ranjit Singh: Maharajah of the Punjab. Bombay, 1962
G. S. Chhābṛā

AMARO, BĪBĪ, elder daughter of Gurū Aṅgad and Mātā Khīvī, is especially
remembered in the Sikh tradition for introducing (Gurū) Amar Dās to Gurū Aṅgad
whose disciple, and eventually successor in the holy office, he became. She was
born in c. 1526 at Khaḍūr Sāhib, in present-day Amritsar district of the Punjab, and
was married to a nephew of Amar Dās at Bāsarke, now called Bāsarke Gillāṅ, 11 km
southwest of Amritsar. She was known for her piety and had memorized several of
Gurū Nānak's hymns which she recited every morning, amid her household chores.
Once Amar Dās happened to listen to a hymn from Bībī Amaro's lips, and felt deeply
moved. He desired to see the living successor of Gurū Nānak, who had uttered
poetry of such vivid spiritual insinght. Bībī Amaro escorted him to Gurū Aṅgad's
presence which he left never again. Bībī Amaro died at Bāsarke where a shrine built
in her honour still exists.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Bhallā, Sarūp Dās, Mahimā Prakāsh . Patiala, 1971.
Satibīr Siṅgh, Parbatu Merāṇu. Jalandhar, 1983.
Ranjit Siṅgh, Gurū Amar Das Ji. Amritsar, 1980.
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AMARŪ, BHĀĪ, a devoted Sikh of the time of Gurū Amar Dās. He lived at the village
of Ḍallā, in present-day Kapūrthalā district of the Punjab, and was initiated a Sikh at
the hands of Gurū Amar Dās.

See RĀMU BHĀĪ
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Manī Siṅgh, Bhāī, Sikhāṅ dī Bhagat Mālā Amritsar, 1955.
Santokh Siṅgh, Bhāī, Srī Gur Pratāp Sūraj Granth. Amritsar, 1926-37.
Balbīr Siṅgh Dil

AMĀVAS (AMĀVASYĀ), massiā in Punjabi, lit. a combination of amā, i. e. together,
and vasyā, i. e. stationing, signifying coming of the sun and the moon together in
one line, is the last day of the dark half of the lunar month when the moon remains
entirely hidden from our view. The twenty- eight nakṣatras, considered to be the
wives of the moon, are the lunar mansions or stations through which the moon
passes as does the sun through the twelve signs of the zodiac. The life of an
individual is believed to be deeply influenced by the nakṣatra through which the
moon passed at the time of his birth. Thus, different days such as Pañchamī (fifth),
ekādasī (eleventh), pūranmāshī (the fifteenth day when the moon is full) and
amāvas assumed a special significance in the Hindu tradition. Certain religious
performances and observances came to be associated with these days. In Sikh
Scripture, the Gurū Granth Sāhib, occur three compositions under the title Thitī or
Thitīṅ with couplets to match the lunar days. The burden of these compositions is
that no single day is more auspicious than the others. That day alone is auspicious
and well spent which is spent in meditating on the Divine Name and in doing good
deeds. Although there is no ritualistic or formal observance prescribed in Sikh system
for Amāvas, the day is marked by special congregations in gurdwārās. Devotees
gather for ablutions in sarovars, the holy tanks. The shrines at Tarn Tāran and
Muktsar especially attract on the occasion pilgrims from long distances.
Tāran Siṅgh

AMBĀLĀ, (30º-23'N, 76º-47'E), a city in Haryāṇā, has several historical shrines
sacred to the Gurūs.
GURDWĀRĀ BĀDSHĀHĪ BĀGH, situated near the district courts, occupies the
site which used to be a halting place for the Mughal emperors when travelling from
Delhi to the Punjab or Kashmīr. Gurū Gobind Siṅgh came here at the end of 1670 or
in early 1671 during one of his excursions from Lakhnaur. Then only a small child,
he had greatly impressed Pīr Nūr Dīn (or Mīr Dīn), custodian of the nearby Muslim
shrine. According to local tradition, the young Gurū miraculously made ordinary
sparrows fight against the arrogant Pīr's hawk which, badly mauled, fell down dead
near Labhū kā Tālāb in another part of the city. The Pīr, now humbled, made
obeisance to the Gurū, and built a platform in his honour. Later during the last
quarter of the eighteenth century, Mehar Siṅgh of Nishānāṅvālī misl raised a small
gurdwārā which, however, was blown off during a British attack on the rebel forces
in 1857. The land thereafter passed into private possession. The owner, having
become aware of the sanctity of the place, built a room on the old foundations, but
it was in a state of neglect when the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee
took it over in 1926. Five years later, through the initiative of Sant Gurmukh Siṅgh of
Paṭiālā, the Sikhs erected a more befitting building and laid out a garden around it.
The present complex was raised by Nirmalā saints after the partition of 1947. The
management again passed to the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee and
the Nirmalās shifted to an āshram near by.
The Gurdwārā entered through a high gate in a wall with ramparts giving it the
appearance of a fortress. The rectangular dīvān hall has a vaulted ceiling. The
sanctum within the hall marks the site of the old shrine.
GURDWĀRĀ GOBINDPURĀ PĀTSHĀHĪ DĀSVĪṄ, located along the Jain College
Road, close to an old tank called Labbhū kā Tālāb is sacred to Gurū Gobind Siṅgh.
According to local tradition, Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, during his visit to Ambālā in 167071, in order to humble the pride of an arrogant Muslim divine, Pīr Nūr Dīn,
miraculously made sparrows kill the Pīr's hawk. The hawk, chased by the sparrows,
fell down dead near Labhū kā Tālāb. It was a Muslim locality. Pīr Sayyid Shāh,
another Muslim divine, witnessed the miracle from here, and sought from the young
Gurū the favour of a spring of sweet water as the wells in the area were brackish.
The well dug at the Gurū's instance still exists in the backyard of the gurdwārā. The
present building, however, was constructed only after 1947. It consists of a single
flat roofed hall, which includes a square sanctum, marking the site of the original
shrine.
GURDWĀRĀ MAÑJĪ SĀHIB (BĀOLĪ SĀHIB) is the premier gurdwārā of the city.
Gurū Hargobind, while on his way to Delhi to meet Emperor Jahāṅgīr, stayed here
for a night. The place, then a small village called Khurrampur, suffered from a
chronic scarcity of water. The Gurū asked his followers to construct a bāolī, or a well
with steps reaching down to water level. The bāolī was ready by the time he
returned and broke journey here again for an overnight halt. Gurū Gobind Siṅgh is
also said to have visited the place travelling towards Kurukshetra in 1702. According
to local tradition, Bandā Siṅgh Bahādur also halted here before advancing upon
Chhat-Banūṛ and Sirhind in 1710. On the establishment of Sikh power in the Punjab
during the second half of the eighteenth century, Ambālā and its surrounding
territory fell to the share of the Nishānāṇvālī Misl. Mehar Siṅgh of this misl or

chiefship got the bāolī restored and had a room built on the site of the old Mañjī
Sāhib. Khurrampur village was subsequently destroyed by floods in the river Ṭāṅgrī,
and the shrine remained in a state of neglect until Mahārājā Hīrā Siṅgh (1843-1911)
of Nābhā rebuilt it at the beginning of the twentieth century. Following the partition
of the Punjab in 1947, the Sikh population increased with migrations from West
Punjab. The cornerstone of a new building was laid on 12 May 1951. The main
building consists of an imposing three-storeyed gateway, flanked by octagonal
domed towers and a spacious rectangular hall. Within the hall is the sanctum
marking the site of the original Mañjī Sāhib. Thebāolī is at the farthest end of the
hall. A local committee manages the shrine subject to the overall control of the
Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee. A girls school, named in honour of
Gurū Hargobind, functions on the premises of the Gurdwārā. The most important
festival of the year is the birth anniversary of Gurū Hargobind which comes off in the
month of June.
GURDWĀRĀ SATSAṄG SĀHIB honours the memory of Gurū Tegh Bahādur and
Gurū Gobind Siṅgh. Gurū Gobind Siṅgh (1666-1708), once on his way from
Anandpur to Kurukshetra, halted here under a tree near the potters' huts. An old
man, Mehar Dhūmīāṅ, urged the Gurū to shift away from the tree which, he said,
was haunted. He described an old incident saying that one evening an unidentified
traveller had stopped there with his load of a covered basket and had asked him
(Dhūmīāṅ) if there was a Sikh house in the vicinity. Dhūmīāṅ had directed the
wayfarer towards the locality where the shrine of Twakkal Shāh stood, but, to his
horror, he observed bloodstains on the branch-leaves where the stranger had hung
his basket. From the circumstances narrated Gurū Gobind Siṅgh could make out that
the stranger was no other than Bhāī Jaitā, carrying to Anandpur the head of Gurū
Tegh Bahādur. A platform was raised on the site. Gurū Gobind Siṅgh prolonged his
stay holding holy assemblies or satsaṅg for the Sikhs. The shrine came to be known
as Gurdwārā Satsaṅg. For a long time this sacred spot remained part of the private
house of its priests. It was only in 1934 that a committee was formed. A new
building was raised in 1935. In recent years another hall has been added, enclosing
the older double storeyed domed structure.
GURDWĀRĀ SĪS GAÑJ, about 300 metres from Gurdwārā Mañjī Sāhib, is sacred
to Gurū Tegh Bahādur. After the Gurū had been executed publically in Delhi on 11
November 1675 under the orders of Emperor Auraṅgzīb, one of his Sikhs, Bhāī Jaitā
carried off his severed head to Anandpur, while his body was cremated by Bhāī
Lakkhī Shāh in Delhi. Bhāī Jaitā travelling incognito with the Gurū's head (sīs) stayed
in a Sikh's house in Ambālā, the site of the Gurdwārā Sīs Gañj. Local devotees raised
a platform to mark the spot. In 1913, when the Sikh Educational Conference met for
its sixth annual session at Ambālā, the site sprang into limelight. The custodians of
the adjoining Muslim shrine of Twakkal Shāh objected to the Sikhs' visiting the place
in large numbers. A civil suit followed which, however, went in the Sikhs' favour. In
1925, the control was entrusted to the newly constituted Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā
Parbandhak Committee. The new building, completed in 1969, consists of a double
storeyed domed gateway and a small dīvān hall.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Tārā Siṅgh, Srī Gur Tīrath Saṅgrahi. Amritsar, n. d.
Ṭhākar Siṅgh, Giānī, Srī Gurduāre Darshan. Amritsar, 1923

3.

Randhir, G. S. , Sikh Shrines in India. Delhi, 1990
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AMĪĀ, BHĀĪ (d. 1635), a devoted Sikh of the time of Gurū Hargobind. He was one of
the five disciples sent to supervise the inhabitation of the village of Ruhelā, renamed
after Gurū Hargobind. Bhāī Amīā took part in the battle of Amritsar (1634).
According to Gurbilās Chhevīṅ Pātshāhī, he commanded, jointly with Bhāī Miharā, a
contingent of 500 Sikhs in the battle of Kartārpur fought in April 1635. He was killed
in action and Gurū Hargobind had the cremation rites performed, before leaving for
Kiratpur the following day.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Twārīkh Gurū Khālsā. Patiala, 1970
Gurbilās Chhevīṅ Pātshāhī. Patiala 1970
Bhagat Siṅgh

AMĪR CHAND, son of Misr Rām Kumār of the village of Ḍalvāl, in Jehlum district,
joined service in Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh's toshākhānā or treasury in 1830, soon
becoming superintendent of Belā Toshākhānā, i. e. the treasury for charitable
purposes. In June 1832, he was appointed to collect arrears of land revenue from
the zamīndārs of Jalandhar and Rāhoṅ and was assigned to Kashmīr on similar duty
in 1838. In 1839, he accompanied Kaṅvar Nau Nihāl Siṅgh to Peshāwar as custodian
of the treasury. After Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh's death, Amīr Chand was sent to
Haridvār to trace and recover the treasure of Jamādār Khushāl Siṅgh's son, Kishan
Siṅgh, who had it secretly transferred to the British territory. He also served as
agent of the Lahore Darbār at Ludhiāṇā, and as governor of Gujrāt and Piṇḍ Dādan
Khān. After the first Anglo-Sikh war (1845-46), John Lawrence, the British Resident
at Lahore, dismissed him from service for defalcation of funds and his jāgīrs were
confiscated.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Sūrī, Sohan LāI, 'Umdāt ut-Twārīkh. Lahore, 1885-89
Griffin, Lepel, and C. F. Massy, Chiefs and Families of Note in the Punjab.
Lahore, 1909
Gupta, Hari Ram, Punjab of the Eve of First Sikh War. Chandigarh, 1956
Khushwant Siṅgh, Ranjit Singh : Maharajah of the Punjab. Bombay, 1962
Harī Rām Gupta

AMĪR SIṄGH, an Akālī or Nihaṅg who was a veteran soldier, joined the band of Bhāī
Mahārāj Siṅgh, leading a popular rebellion against the British in 1848-49. When the
British deputy commissioner of Jalandhar, Vansittart, raided Mahārāj Siṅgh's camp
near Sham Chaurāsī on the night of 28-29 December 1849, Amīr Siṅgh attacked him
with an axe but was himself wounded by a pistol shot fired by Vansittart. He died
three days later.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ahluwalia, M. L. , Bhai Maharaj Singh. Patiala, 1972
M. L. Āhlūwālīā

AMĪR SIṄGH, GIĀNĪ (1870-1954), a widely revered Sikh schoolman, was born in
1870 at the village of Dargāhī Shāh in Jhaṅg district, now in Pakistan. His parents,
Prem Siṅgh and Ṭhākarī Devī, a religious minded couple of modest means, admitted
him at the age of 15 to Mahant Jawāhar Siṅgh Sevāpanthī's ḍerā or monastery, in
Sattovālī Galī in Amritsar, to learn Sikh sacred music and scriptures. After the death,
in 1888, of Mahant Jawāhar Siṅgh, Amīr Siṅgh had his further education and
religious training under Mahant Uttam Siṅgh, the new head of the ḍerā, and later
from Giānī Bhagvān Siṅgh and Giānī Bakhshīsh Siṅgh, both noted men of letters of
their time. Soon Giānī Amīr Siṅgh's scholarship came to be acknowledged. Mahant
Uttam Siṅgh, head of the ḍerā, chose him his successor during his own lifetime. For
over 60 years, Giānī Amīr Siṅgh taught Sikh scriptural texts to hundreds of scholars
at his ḍerā in Sattovālī Galī, which became a well known school of Sikh learning. In
expounding the holy Gurū Granth Sāhib and other texts such as the Dasam Granth
and Srī Gur Pratāp Sūraj Granth, he had few rivals.
Giānī Amīr Siṅgh, who remained celibate all his life, dressed himself in a white
toga. In 1945, he was chosen president of the Rāgamālā Maṇḍan Committee formed
to counteract the movement for the expunction from the Gurū Granth Sāhib of the
last composition, Rāgamālā, recounting in verse some of the rāgasor musical
measures employed in the Holy Book.
Giānī Amīr Siṅgh died at Amritsar on 17 October 1954 at the ripe age of 84 and
was succeeded by Sant Kirpāl Siṅgh as head of the ḍerā.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Gurmukh Siṅgh, Sevāpanthīāṅ dī Pañjābī Sāhit nūṅ Deṇ. Patiala, 1986
Lāl Chand, Bhāī, Srī Sant Ratan Mālā. Patiala, 1954
Sarmukh Siṅgh Amole

AMĪR SIṄGH SANDHĀṄVĀLĪĀ (d. 1827), a collateral of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh, was
born the son of Dīdār Siṅgh Sandhāṅvālīā. In 1784, he, upon the death of his father,
succeeded to the family estates which he considerably enlarged. As Mahāṅ Siṅgh
and Raṇjīt Siṅgh rose to power, he seized several villages in the neighbourhood of
Rājā Sāṅsī. In 1803, however, Amīr Siṅgh fell into disgrace at the Sikh court. The
story is that one morning as Raṇjīt Siṅgh came out of the Samman Burj and was
preparing to mount his horse, Amīr Siṅgh was seen to unsling his gun, prime it and
blow the match. The bystanders accused him of seeking the life of his chief, and
Raṇjīt Siṅgh, who believed the charge, dismissed him from court. He took refuge
with Bābā Sāhib Siṅgh Bedi of Ūnā at whose intercession the Mahārājā again took
him into his favour, and placed him specially under the protection and in the force of
Atar Siṅgh Kāliāṅvālā. Amīr Siṅgh accompanied the Mahārājā in the Kasūr campaign
of 1807, and in the expedition against the Muhammadan tribes between the Chenāb
and the Indus in 1810. In 1809, when on the death of Rājā Jai Siṅgh of Jammū,
Raṇjīt Siṅgh seized that country, he made over the territory to Amīr Siṅgh. In 1821,
Amīr Siṅgh received Shakargaṛh in jāgīr.
Amīr Siṅgh died in 1827. His jāgīrs amounting to upwards of rupees six lakhs
annually were continued to his sons, Atar Siṅgh, Lahiṇā Siṅgh and Basāvā Siṅgh.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Sūrī, Sohan Lāl, 'Umdāt-ut-Twārīkh. Lahore, 1885-89
Griffin, Lepel, and C. F. Massy, Chiefs and Families of Note in the Punjab.
Lahore, 1909
Sardār Siṅgh Bhāṭīā

AMĪR UL-IMLĀ, also known as MUNTAKHAB UL-HAQĀ'IQ, a collection of
miscellaneous letters, in Persian script, mostly of Sikh chiefs of the Punjab addressed
to one another on subjects relating to private and public affairs. Compiled by Amīr
Chand in A. H. 1209 (AD l794-95), the manuscript comprises 127 folios and 247
letters and is preserved in the Oriental section of the British Library, London. On folio
125 of the manuscript is recorded a note referring to one Imānullah as its owner,
implying that this is perhaps not the original copy prepared by Amīr Chand.
However, no other copy, except a photostat of the British Museum manuscript
secured by Dr Gaṇḍā Siṅgh for his personal use, is known to exist. The colophon
inscribed on this copy indicates that it was Dalpat Rāi, son of Khushiābī Mall Sahgal,
of Jaṇḍiālā Sher Khān, who originally collected these letters for compilation, but
death prevented him from accomplishing the work which was then completed by his
brother, Amīr Chand.
The collection contains correspondence of chiefs such as Mahārājā Raṇjīt
Siṅgh, the Afghān Amīr Taimūr Shāh, Karam Siṅgh Bhaṅgī, Jai Siṅgh Kanhaiyā, Jodh
Siṅgh, Sāhib Siṅgh of Paṭiālā, Fateh Siṅgh Āhlūvālīā, Jhaṇḍā Siṅgh Bhaṅgī, Rāṇī
Sadā Kaur and some of the Marāṭhā rulers.
The contents of these letters cover a wide range of subjects such as the
collection of revenue, formation of coalitions against aggressors, conquests,
marriages and deaths in the families and the need for good neighbourly relations. In
most of the letters the smaller rulers give vent to their sense of insecurity and
apprehension at the expansionist policy of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh who, they said,
was vanquishing smaller kingdoms in the name of the unification of the scattered,
broken and divided Punjab. A very important letter in this collection is from Mahārājā
Raṇjīt Siṅgh addressed to the Emperor of Britain (ff. 20-21). The letter, besides
commending the British Indian government for their equal treatment of all their
subjects irrespective of their religious faith, attests to Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh's own
conviction that the sovereignty was conferred upon the Khālsā by Gurū Gobind Siṅgh
and that they still ruled in the name of their Gurū, declaring that he wielded power
in the name of the Khālsā.
Ratan Siṅgh Bhaṅgī is critical of the aggressive designs of Raṇjīt Siṅgh who, he
says, "inspired by his high position, army, artillery and treasury, wishes to place the
whole of the Punjab under his own control. " He writes to Muhammad Khān (ff. 3940) about Raṇjīt Siṅgh's conquest of the area of the Syāls and his "impious designs"
to establish his sovereignty over others. Similarly, there is a letter (ff. 23-24) by the
Sūbahdār of Multān addressed to Taimūr Shāh requesting him to use his good
offices with Raṇjīt Siṅgh so as to check his inroads into their territory.
There are several letters from Raṇjīt Siṅgh addressed to various sardārs
informing them of the action he took against the unruly people (f. 83) such as
dispatching an army to subdue a rebel, Khān Beg Ṭiwāṇā, who was formerly his
subordinate (ff. 71-72). A letter from Dal Siṅgh and Jodh Siṅgh addressed to Jai
Siṅgh records the date (4 Baisākh/April; Wednesday) (chār ghaṛī rāt gae, i. e. before
midnight) as the time of the death of Mahāṅ Siṅgh Sukkarchakkīā (f. 10). In all
these letters, the Sikh chiefs address each other Siṅgh Sāhib, Bhāī Sāhib, or Khālsā
Jīo.
Bhagat Siṅgh

AMRĪK SIṄGH, a Jambar Jaṭṭ of Maghiāṇā in Lahore district, was a devoted Sikh of
the time of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh. Bhāī Santokh Siṅgh, Srī Gur Pratāp Sūraj Granth,
lists him among those who received baptismal rites on the day the Khālsā was
initiated (30 March 1699). Amrīk Siṅgh, according to Bhāī Santokh Siṅgh again, took
part in Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's first battle at Anandpur in 1700.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Santokh Siṅgh, Bhāī, Srī Gur Pratāp Sūraj Granth. Amritsar, 1926-37
Gurnek Siṅgh

AMRĪK SIṄGH, BHĀĪ, See SRĪ DARBĀR SĀHIB

AMRIT, derived from Sanskritamṛtadefined variously as not dead, immortal,
imperishable; beautiful, beloved; world of immortality, heaven; immortality, eternity;
final emancipation; nectar, ambrosia; nectar-like food; antidote against poison; or
anything sweet, commonly means a liquid or drink by consuming which one attains
everlasting life or immortality. It is in this sense that the word was first used in the
Vedic hymns. According to Hindu mythology, amrit was extracted by the gods by
churning the ocean with the assistance of the demons and it was by drinking it that
the gods became immortal. A similar concept of an immortalizing drink also exists in
Greek and Semitic mythologies wherein it is variously called ambrosia, nectar or āb-ihayāt. In the Sikh tradition, amrit is not some magical potion that would confer upon
the consumer an unending span of life or bring about automatic release from the
cycle of birth, death and rebirth. The term is however retained figuratively to signify
what leads to such release. In this sense, amrit is not something external to man
"but is within him and is received by God's grace" (GG, 1056, 1238). In the holy
hymns, amrit is repeatedly equated with nām , the Name, or Śabda , the Word (e. g.
GG, 729, 644, 538, 394). It is amrit of the True Name which when imbibed quenches
and satiates all appetites (GG, 594).

Amrit is also used in gurbāṇī in the adjectival sense of sweet, delicious, good,
sweet-sounding, etc. in phrases such as amritu bhojanu nāmu harī - God's Name is
delicious food (GG, 556), amrit kathā - dulcet discourse (GG, 255), amrit drisṭiimmortalizing glance (GG, 191), amritā pria bachan tuhāre - sweet are Thy words, O
Dear One (GG, 534). Gurū Amar Dās in an aṣṭpadī (eight-stanza hymn) in Mājh
measure describes different characteristics of amrit such as eradicator of egoity,
producer of amrit effect, a means to liv (concentration, ) and giver of happiness (GG,
118-19).

This amrit of God's Name is realized from within the self and can be realized at
any hour of day or night, but the best time conducive to realization is the last
quarter of night or the early morning to which Gurū Nānak refers as amrit velā when
the devotee may contemplate the greatness of God (GG, 2). Gurū Aṅgad says that
during early morning, the last quarter of night, the awakened ones develop a
fondness for cultivating the True Name (GG, 146). Historically, amrit in the Sikh
tradition refers to the baptismal water Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, Nānak X, consecrated for
the initiatory rites promulgated in supersession of charan-amrit at the time of the
creation of the Khālsā brotherhood. This is called Khaṇḍe dā Amrit or nectar touched
with the double-edged sword.

See PĀHUL
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Sikh Rahit Maryādā. Amritsar, 1975
Kapur Siṅgh, Pāraśārapraśna. Amritsar, 1989
Cole, W. Owen, and Piara Singh Sambhi, The Sikhs: Their Religious Beliefs
and Practices . Delhi 1978
Sher Singh, ed. , Thoughts on Symbols in Sikhism. Lahore, 1927
Harbans Singh, The Heritage of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1983
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AMRIT RĀI, son of Chhail Rāi, a Bhaṭṭ of Lahore, and pupil of Chatar Dās, a noted
poet, had completed his Ras Ratnākar and Chitra Bilās ( the latter in 1679) before he
came under the patronage of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh at Anandpur. What is left of his
compositions while with the Gurū is his rendering in Hindi verse of a parva or part
from the Māhābhārata and a stanza quoted by Bhāī Santokh Siṅgh, Srī Gur Pratāp
Sūraj Granth (q. v.), ritu 5, aṅsū 26. In the latter stanza Amrit Rāi sings the fame of
the Gurū as a bounteous patron and offers himself for service. The former, entitled
Sabhā Parab, was completed on Baisākh vadī2, 1753 Bk/ 8 April 1696. The only
known Gurmukhī manuscript of this work is preserved in the private collection of the
Mahārājā of Paṭiālā.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Kāhn Siṅgh, Bhāī, Gurushabad Ratnākar Mahān Kosh. Patiala, 1974
Padam, Piārā Siṅgh, Gurū Gobind Siṅgh Jī de Darbārī Ratan. Patiala, 1976
Piārā Siṅgh Padam

AMRIT SAṄSKĀR, See PĀHUL

AMRIT VELĀ, lit. ambrosial hour (velā=time or hour), the last quarter of night or
predawn morning hours, is reckoned in Sikh spirituality as period of time most
conducive to concentration and appropriate for meditation and practising nām, i. e.
repetition of God's Name. Says Gurū Nānak in the Japu : amrit velā sachu nāu vaḍiāī
vīchāru (early morning is the time for practising nām, God's Name synonymous with
God Himself, and for contemplating His greatness - GG, 2). Gurū Aṅgad, Nānak II,
says: chauthai pahari sabāh kai surtiā upajai chāu/ tinā darīāvā siu dostī mani mukhi
sachā nāu (during fourth quarter of night, joy sprouts forth in the hearts of
awakened ones; they go, befriend the rivers and brooks (for ablution) and have the
True Name in their minds and on their lips - GG, 146). Shaikh Farīd, the Muslim
saint, whose compositions are also included in the Sikh Scripture, is more forthright.
Says he, "If you lose the last part of night to sleep, O Farīd! count yourself as dead
even as you live. (Remember that) if you have forgotten God, He has not forgotten
thee (GG, 1383). Gurū Rām Dās, laying down the daily regimen for a Sikh accorded
primacy to early rising to contemplate God's Name, "Let him who calls himself a Sikh
of the Gurū, rise early and meditate on God" (GG, 305). And, Gurū Arjan, Nānak V,
says : "Rise early in the morning and repeat God's Name" (GG, 255). To quote Bhāī
Gurdās: "The Gurū's Sikh rises early in the morning, performs ablutions at amrit velā
and recites the Gurū's word" (Vārāṅ, 40:11)

Amrit velā in Sikhism is the prime hour not for its own sake, but because of its
suitability for practising nām, i. e. for remembering God and contemplating His
greatness. No special auspiciousness attaches to amrit velā. Every moment of one's

life is meant for the remembrance of God. As Gurū Arjan says, "Blessed is the hour
(velā) when one gets absorbed in contemplation of Him" (GG, 562).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Shabdārth Srī Gurū Granth Sāhib Jī. Amritsar, 1964
Padam, Piārā Siṅgh, ed. , Gurū Granth Vichār-Kosh. Patiala, 1969
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AMRITA SHER-GIL (1913-1941), colourful and innovative painter of modern India,
was born on 30 January 1913 in Budapest, Hungary. Her father, Umrāo Siṅgh SherGil, scholar and savant, learned in Sanskrit as well as in Persian, came of an old Sikh
family of the village of Majīṭhā, in Amritsar district of the Punjab. Her mother, Marie
Antoinette, was a Hungarian of noble descent with artistic leanings. She had some
Jewish blood about which she was generally very discreet, and possessed a
gregarious, gushing manner which could charm society snobs, but bewilder those
close to her. She came out to the Punjab with Princess Bamba, who had through a
public notice published in London sought a companion to travel with her to India,
the land of her forbears. Princess Bamba was the daughter of the last Sikh of the
Punjab, Mahārājā Duleep Siṅgh, who after the occupation of his territory by the
British and exile from the Punjab had been at that time living in England. Marie
Antoinette made the acquaintance of Umrāo Siṅgh in Shimlā and this acquaintance
led to marriage. They travelled together to Budapest where their first child, Amrita,
was born. To go by the census standards for determining the nationality of a child,
Amrita was after her male parent a Punjabi Jaṭṭ. But her first visit to the Punjab
came off only at the age of eight. World War I prevented her parents' return to
India. In the Punjab, the family lived on the slopes of Summer Hill at Shimlā and in
Sarayā, a village in the Gorakhpur district of Uttar Pradesh where her father held an
estate. The scenic beauty of the hills and dales and of the Himalayan peaks not far
away from their Summer Hill residence left a deep impact on Amrita's aesthetic
sensibility. Upon the recommendation of the English teacher who had been hired to
teach her art and music and who had soon recognized her unusual talent, she in
1924 went, accompanied by her mother, to Florence, Italy, to join the art school of
Santa Anunciata. However, the daily religious routine, strict discipline and rigid
curriculum there did not suit her temperament and she left the school after
completing only one semester, returning to India with her mother.
In April 1929 she joined Grand Chaumiere, a well known art school in Paris,
where she studied for one semester, shifting thereafter to the Ecole Nationale des
Beaux Arts. She made a very minute study of the human anatomy, perspective and
various techniques of oil painting. The encouragement she received from her
teacher, Lucien Simon, who admired her talent and frequently commended her
progress, stimulated her creative energies. In Paris, she frequented art studios, art
galleries and art museums. She studied the original works of the great masters. The
paintings of Paul Cezanne taught her the art of compact composition and the
technique of modelling to represent the third dimension. Gauguin's Tahitian
paintings, with their sensitive draughtsmanship and effective use of colour,
especially his technique of using flat areas of pigments marking Tahitian sunshine,
made a special appeal to her.
Graduating from the Ecole Nationale des Beaux Arts, Amrita left for India in
November 1934 to find her own sunshine. But her romantic vision of her motherland
- "voluptuous, colourful, sunny. . . " as she had imagined it to be - soon gave way
to, again in her own words, "the vision of Winter in India - desolate, yet strangely
beautiful - of endless tracks of luminous yellow grey land, of dark bodied, sad faced, incredibly thin men and women who move silently, looking almost like
silhouettes over which an indefinable melancholy reigns. " To capture and interpret
the weariness she saw on the faces of the vast numbers became the main concern
of her creative vision.

In June 1938, she travelled to Hungary to marry her maternal cousin, Dr Victor
Egan. After their honeymoon in Europe, the couple returned to India. Dr Egan took
up employment with Amrita's uncle, Sundar Siṅgh Majīṭhīā, who owned a sugar
factory at Sarayā. Dr Egan served there as a physician. Here at Sarayā, Amrita went
through a new phase in her creative experience. She felt that "another period of
transition is approaching, one of greater reflection, of more conscious painting, more
observation and more stylization in the sense of nature. " She blossoms forth into a
jubilant mood and looks at her surroundings, at flora and fauna especially with fresh
tenderness and excitement. Out of this period came paintings of landscapes and
animals.
In September 1941, Amrita migrated to Lahore where her husband, Dr Egan,
set up his own practice. Here she started work on a painting of buffaloes in a
suburban setting which was never to be completed. In Lahore she fell a prey on 3
December 1941 to virulent bacillary dysentary and died two days later, not quite
twenty-nine then.
Amrita Sher-Gil's career, tragically brief, remains a landmark in the history of
the art of painting. She synthesized the technique of the West with the influence of
Indian environment. The fact that Amrita Sher-Gil went to an art school in Paris and
stayed there, ostensibly practising life drawing consistently for five years, shows that
she made a conventional enough beginning. At an average art school in Western
Europe drawing from the model and obvious construction are considered the most
essential qualifications of an artist. A flower must look like a flower and figures
reproduced the scale. The concrete object is exalted and the feeling which this
photographic and naturalistic representation is supposed to arouse is considered the
supreme test. A painter who can draw men and women so that they look exactly like
men and women generally wins the school medal or is hung in the academy.
It is easily conceivable how Amrita began to think of India, the India that had
belonged to her child's world, romantically, almost as Gauguin had thought of the
South Sea is lands. And, obviously, she wanted to return and apply the technique
she had learnt in the studios of Paris to India, to come and paint her dream world
with the 'objectivity' of Cezanne, who dominated her mind as he dominated the best
part of the art world of Western Europe.
In Paris she practised drawing and sought to learn the lesson of Cezanne, that
by painting still life pictures and landscapes, in which one had to concentrate on an
object with definite structure, one is able to realize the objective nature of things in
terms of paint and canvas. And she understood his emphasis on the intimate relation
between form and colour in nature, on the necessity of design in colour, this to say
of design not as a thing in itself but as a harmony of colour.
If Cezanne showed Amrita Sher-Gil the way to the organization of form, she
took her initial cue for the organization of colour from Gauguin. But, as Mr
Khaṇḍālāvālā has very pertinaciously pointed out, her affinity with Gauguin is
superficial. For, actually, the broad planes of colour and the plastic effects which she
tried to achieve in her canvases are owed to Cezanne's reduction of objects to their
essential planes and to her own uncompromising quest for simplicity through her
absorption of Western teachings as well as of the lessons of early Indian sculpture
and medieval Indian painting.

The first few paintings on which Amrita worked in her studio in Shimlā show a
sculpturesque technique, both in the folds of the dresses and the severity of planes.
The still, immobile figures in Hill Men and Hill Women, thought almost static, are yet
however essentially dramatic, because of the way in which they are related to each
other in the composition. Already Amrita Sher-Gil is blending the skilled
draughtsmanship she has learnt in Paris with a compassionate vision of the unhappy
Indian people, with a strict avoidance of rhetoric or ornamentation, and she is
gathering the uncontoured forms before her, through the organization of volume
with colour, into a new kind of symmetry or balance. What seems like distortion or
inadequate drawing in her pictures to some people is a coherence attained through
inner feeling, a kind of metaphysical aim, the mastery of nature and its use by the
artist to express deep emotion. And it is clear that few artists in contemporary India
have handled colour with quite the passionate joy which Amrita-Sher Gil brought to
it. And yet all these gay and bright colours are used to communicate the essential
melancholy of this land and her inhabitants. In Group of Three Girls and Child
Wifethe colours are even brighter and the resultant sadness more poignant. For a
fiery almost searingly angry, imagination is at work, an elemental vision armed with
a palette and a brush that are like fire and sword. And the curious thing is that it is
precisely by eschewing obvious literary aims and concentrating on the organization
of colour that Amrita has attained her imaginative aims.
The struggle to realize herself through paint dominated her and she remained
an experimentalist throughout her life, waging an uncompromising war against
complacence, and straining to achieve greater control over her medium. In 1936 she
made pilgrimages to the shrines of Indian art. She went first to see the wall
paintings of Ajantā and the nearby temple of Ellorā, hewn out of rock. Then she
visited Travancore and Cochīn and saw the magnificent murals of the Mattancherī
Palace. Her impressions of these places are characteristic. Though finding Ajantā
"curiously subtle and fascinating" she thought the paintings "too involved
compositionally and the details of jewellery in particular feebly painted, badly
constructed. " This reaction was natural from one who had made clear organization
of form and colour her god. "Simply extraordinary, " she exclaimed. "Dangerous stuff
to take into the system unassimilated. " But when she met good construction in the
frescoes of the Mattancherī Palace after having seen the paintings in the
Padmanābhapuram temple in Travancore, she wrote to Karl Khaṇḍālāvālā : "When I
saw them I realized why I hadn't been colossally impressed by the ones at
Travancore. I had a vague feeling that much more could be done with it than what
had been done, that much greater possibilities lay in that material. And in Cochin I
found that justification for that feeling. I have seldom seen such powerful drawing.
It often surpasses Ajanta. "
The charm and depth of the South worked on her, its rich, sensuous, intricate
life with the bright colours of its flowers, the chiselled faces of its inhabitants and the
grace of their garments captivated her. She wanted to stay and paint. She did
actually settle down for a few days at Cape Comorin and executed the picture called
Fruit Vendors, the first superb result of the pilgrimages to the Deccan and the lower
reaches of the Peninsula. For the new coherence of her draughtsmanship and
brilliant colouring here seems to owe itself in part at least to Ajantā.
The harmony foreshadowed in the Fruit Vendors is more completely realized in
three monumental pictures which she painted on her return to Shimlā, and which

she called her South Indian trilogy, namely The Bride's Toilet, The Brahmachārīs and
South Indian Villagers Going to Market. All the elements of her make up have here
combined to render possible three of the most vital canvases which she was ever to
paint in her brief life. The plastic to which she was always reducing her figures flows
with a linear rhythm, itself completely one with her newly mixed colours and her
profound sense of irony, the pity in her. And her grasp of objective truth seems to
have been compelled by an intense, almost convalescent, tenderness much like
Dostoevsky's, and she seems near enough to achieving what Cezanne wanted to
attain, in the manner of Poussin, poetic truth. As we gaze at South Indian Villagers
Going to Market are we not meeting the very fatalism of India's malaise? Says
Professor Dickinson, "Here is gathered no happiness, no laughter, but a brooding
melancholy seems to beckon at us as we note those attenuated frames of old and
young. Out of their eyes comes too that mute reproach to the god of seasons and
unyielding crops. " The sheer strain of working on the South Indian trilogy
exhausted her. She had explored a new line of approach to her objectives in these
pictures. So we find her now doing a series of small canvases, beginning with
Women in Red and embracing Siesta, The Story Teller, Ganesh Pūjā, Elephants
Bathing in a Green Pool and Hill Scene, before she left for Hungary in June 1938 to
marry her cousin Dr Victor Egan.
In this phase of her development Amrita Sher-Gil was obviously influenced by
the Basohlī paintings, which she knew well from Karl Khaṇḍālāvālā's collection and
from the Lahore Museum, as well as by the Kāṅgṛā Kalam and the Mughal
miniatures. Colour is more intensely the hero of her work of this period than ever
before. "I cannot control my appetite for colour, " she said to her friend, "and I
wonder if I ever will. " About the particular way in which she used colour in these
pictures she wrote : "I have tried, though it is very difficult, to give all the figures. . .
the flat relief (I am avoiding volume) of card board figurines pasted into canvas. And
also of obtaining my effects of colourless by play of light and shade, though they are
all open air things, than by the enamelled translucidity of the pate itself. "
Although comparatively small, the canvases of this period are still in the mural
tradition. And it is not surprising that she should choose to assimilate the intense
colouring of Basohlī with the Kāṅgṛā designs, because the latter are mostly a
reduced fresco style and not illustrative miniatures as Mughal paintings generally
are. But whatever the influences which she lived with and whatever environment she
chose to paint in, whether Shimlā or Sarayā, Amrita Sher-Gil was always concerned
to make a synthesis. During her visits abroad she painted some canvases in Hungary
which, though in the European genre and not admitted by Mr Khaṇḍālāvālā in the
Indian canon, are extremely interesting, because they reveal an unerring sense of
visual relatedness in the midst of a phenomenon different from India and yet
intimately connected both with Amrita's early childhood impressions and the
preoccupation with paint which she derived from her Western inheritance.
The war broke out after her return to India in the summer of 1939. She
painted very little in the atmosphere of uncertainty which prevailed, except Resting,
which Mr Khaṇḍālāvālā rightly considers "one of her finest achievements for its sheer
colour beauty, " with its gaily clad females, each a gentle flower among the natural
flowers. But when Amrita settled down in the village of Sarayā, where her husband
was appointed medical officer at her uncle's sugar mill, she was conscious of a new
phase in her work. "Another period of transition is approaching. One of greater

reflection, of more conscious painting, more observation and more stylization in the
sense of nature. "

Elephant Promenade, The Swing, Horse and Groom, Ancient Story Teller,
Woman Resting on a Charpoy, Haldī Grinders, and Camels show her experimenting

with compositions more derivative from the Kāṅgṛā and Mughal paintings than any
of her previous work, but there is a new brightness, a new precision and a new
simplicity here, without the atmosphere of a sad, elfin music, the hallmark of her
tender sensibility.

When she returned from Paris in 1935, renaissance style of art fostered by the
Bengal school held sway in India. Her own source of inspiration, medium and form
had little in common with the Bengal school exponents of which depicted the gods
and goddesses in water colour (wash method) in a strictly two-dimensional form,
whereas Amrita interpreted contemporary life in oils using chiaroscuro, linear-aerial
perspective, and other modelling derives to represent three-dimensional reality.
Unlike the Bengal school which painted "Bhārat Mātā" (personification of Mother
India) giving her an anthropomorphic form, she portrayed "Mother India" as an
aged, forlorn woman with an anaemic son on her lap and a sickly daughter seated
next to her. This is how Amrita pictured her country in British thraldom.
In the final analysis Amrita seems to have been concerned in her art with
redressing the balance of certainty and restating basic truths about human nature,
human folly, and human inadequacy, about the pain and pleasure of the creative
act, and about suffering and the joy of being. She developed a unique style of
painting, maintaining a mysterious harmony of idea, perception and visual image.
She rejected verisimilitude and refused to reproduce a mirror-image of an actual
scene and turned from an empirical to a conceptual method of representation. Her
stylistic implications and colour harmonies introduced a new trend in Indian painting.
To quote Rudy von Leiden :
Art in India was never the same after her comet like appearance. There are
only a few moments in the history of art which pin-point a new departure, a new
direction. Such a moment in the history of modern Indian art was the appearance in
the mid thirties of Amrita Sher-Gil with whose paintings contemporary painting in
India took shape and demonstrated the possibility of a contemporary style and
expression that were, at the same time, of the soil and in direct continuation of the
great national past.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

N. Iqbal Singh, Amrita Sher-gil : A Biography. Delhi, 1984
Khandalavala, Karl, Amrita Sher-gil. Bombay, 1944
Muggeridge, Malcolm, Chronicles of Wasted Times : The Infernal Grove.
London, 1973
Wojtilla, Gyula, Amrita Sher-gil and Hungary. Delhi, 1981
Mulk Rāj Anand
Mohinder Siṅgh Gill

AMRITDHĀRĪ (amrit, lit. nectar, commonly Sikh sanctified initiatory water +dhārī =
practitioner) is one who has received baptismal vows of the Khālsā initiated by Gurū
Gobind Siṅgh (30 March 1699) and abides by them and by the pañj kakārī rahit,
distinctive insignia introduced by the Gurū on that day comprising five symbols, each
beginning with the Gurmukhī letter "ਕ" (pronounced "kakkā") or its Roman
equivalent "k". These are kes (long unshorn hair and beard), kaṅghā (a comb to
keep the hair tidy), kirpān (a sword), kaṛā ( a steel bracelet worn around the wrist),
and kachh (short breeches worn by soldiers).
See PĀHUL
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Sikh Rahit Maryādā, Amritsar, 1975
Kapur Singh, Parāśarapraśna. Amritsar, 1989
Sher Singh, Giani, ed. , Thoughts on Forms and Symbols in Sikhism. Lahore,
1927
Uberoi, J. P. S. , "The Five Symbols of Sikhism, " in Sikhism. Patiala, 1969
Nripinder Singh, The Sikh Moral Tradition. Delhi, 1990

Piārā Siṅgh Sāmbhī

AMRITSAR (31º-38'N, 74º-53'E), principal holy city of the Sikhs, is the headquarters
of a district (Amritsar) in the Punjab. The foundation of the town was laid in 1577 by
Gurū Rām Dās (1534 81) when he inaugurated the digging of the holy tank Amritsar (amrit = nectar, sar = pool) on a piece of land which, according to some
sources, was purchased from the residents of the neighbouring village of Tuṅg
during the time of Gurū Amar Dās (1479-1574) and, according to other sources, was
a gift from the Mughal Emperor Akbar (1542-1605) to Gurū Amar Dās's daughter,
Bībī Bhānī married to (Gurū) Rām Dās. The habitation that grew around the sacred
pool (sarovar) was initially called Ramdāspur, or Chakk Rāmdās, or simply Chakk
Gurū. Gurū Rām Dās encouraged people from various trades and professions to take
up residence here. The town expanded further under his son and successor, Gurū
Arjan (1563-1606), who completed and lined the tank and constructed in its middle
the holy shrine, Harimandar, now famous as the Golden Temple and also had two
more tanks, Santokhsar and Rāmsar, excavated near by. It was on the bank of
Rāmsar that he carried out the compilation of the Ādī Granth (later Gurū Granth
Sāhib). With the installation on 16 August 1604 of the Granth Sāhib in the
Harimandar, the shrine and the sarovar Amritsar surrounding it together became the
central attraction of the town and a site of pilgrimage for Sikhs from far and near. In
time, the town itself came to be called Amritsar.
Gurū Hargobind (1595-1644) constructed near the pool and opposite the
Harimandar, the Akāl Takht, lit. Throne Eternal, where he sat in state dispensing the
secular business of the community. He also gave two more tanks, Kaulsar and
Bibeksar, to the town. Gurū Hargobind constructed a fortress, Lohgaṛh (lit. steel fort)
on the western outskirts of the town. He soon came into conflict with the Mughal
authority and was involved in a succession of skirmishes in and around the town. He
decided to leave Amritsar early in 1635 and shift to Kīratpur, a town in the Śivālik
foothills founded at his bidding by his son, Bābā Gurdittā, a few years earlier. None
of the later Gurūs resided at Amritsar which was controlled during the rest of the
seventeenth century by Gurū Hargobind's cousin, Miharbān, and the latter's son,
Harjī, who headed the schismatic Mīṇā sect. It was only after the creation of the
Khālsā in 1699 that Gurū Gobind Siṅgh deputed Bhāī Manī Siṅgh with a few other
Sikhs to go to Amritsar and resume control of the town and manage the holy shrines
there on behalf of the Khālsā Panth.
During the eighteenth century, Amritsar, like the Sikh community as a whole,
witnessed many vicissitudes of history. It suffered repeatedly desecration and
destruction until it was finally liberated upon the establishment of sovereign
authority of the Sikh misls, principalities, over the Punjab in 1765. The town was
thereafter under the control of several misl chiefs although its surrounding district
was held by Sardār Harī Siṅgh of the Bhāṅgī misl. Different sardārs or chiefs
constructed their own buṅgās or residential houses around the principal sarovarand
also their respective kaṭṛās or wards encouraging traders and craftsmen to reside in
them and over which each exercised exclusive control. The sacred shrines were
however administered by a joint council comprising representatives of the chiefs who
had made endowments in land for their maintenance. Even prior to the time of Sikh
ascendancy, joint councils, known as sarbatt Khālsā(lit. the entire Sikh Panth), to
take crucial decisions on political matters had been held at Amritsar. Now again with
all misl chiefs having their buṅgās there, it became the common capital of the
Khālsā. Devotees from far and near, free to visit the holy city after six decades of
the severest persecution, flocked to Gurū kī Nagarī (the Gurū's town). So did

businessmen and tradesmen to take advantage of the increasing pilgrim and
resident population. Trade, commerce and crafts flourished in different kaṭṛās each
having its own markets and manufactories. By the end of the eighteenth century,
Amritsar had already become Punjab's major trading centre. Yet the town with its
multiple command setup remained a confederated rather than a composite
habitation until Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh (1780-1839) rose to power and consolidated
the whole of the Punjab into one sovereign State.
Raṇjīt Siṅgh, chief of the Sukkarchakkīā misl, who first occupied, in 1799,
Lahore, the traditional capital of the Punjab, and declared himself Mahārājā in 1801,
extended his hegemony to Amritsar in 1805 when he took over from his traditional
rivals, the bhāṅgī chiefs, their fort with its mint striking the Nānakshāhī rupee, and
the famous Zamzamā gun. The fort of the Rāmgaṛhīā misl was occupied in 1815 and
with the possessions of Rāṇī Sadā Kaur of Kanhaiyā Misl and Fateh Siṅgh Āhlūvālīā
in Amritsar during the early 1820's, Raṇjīt Siṅgh's occupation of Amritsar was
complete. He then constructed a double wall and a moat around the city with twelve
gates and their corresponding bridges over the moat. Already in 1809 he had
constructed the Gobindgaṛh Fort outside Lahaurī Gate complete with a formidable
moat, three lines of defence and several bastions and emplacements for heavy guns.
Amritsar thus had already become his second capital. The royal toshākhānā or
treasury was kept in Gobindgaṛh Fort which was also used as the royal residence
during the Mahārājā's frequent visits to the city before his palace in the city, Rām
Bāgh, was completed in 1831. Several members of the nobility also raised palatial
houses and beautiful gardens in and around the city. Raṇjīt Siṅgh devoutly provided
liberal funds to have the dome and exterior of the holy Harimandar gold plated and
to have the interior ornamented with fine filigree and enamel work and with
decorative murals and panels in marble inlaid with coloured stone. Sardār Desā
Siṅgh Majīṭhīā (d. 1832), who had been appointed manager of the holy shrines in
the city since its occupation by Raṇjīt Siṅgh, donated gold for gilding the top of Bābā
Aṭal.
During Sikh rule, Amritsar grew into a leading industrial and commercial city.
The most important industry was textiles, particularly shawl and fine cotton cloth
called sūsī. The shawl making industry received an impetus after a famine in
Kashmīr in 1833, which led to the migration of a large number of skilled Kashmīrī
weavers to the city. The raw material, pashmīnā wool, came from the transHimalayan regions of Ladākh, Tibet and Central Asia. Other important industries
included silk weaving, carpet making, brass and copper ware and ivory goods.
Amritsar continued to enjoy its precedence as the holiest city of the Sikhs as
well as the most important commercial and industrial centre in the northwest India
even after the annexation of the Punjab to the British empire in 1849. According to
the first ever official census in the Punjab conducted in 1855, Amritsar had a
population of 112, 186 against 94, 143 of Lahore. Its population increased by 30,
000 during the next thirty years. In 1890, with its population of 152, 000, it was the
13th largest city in India. It was connected by rail to Lahore in 1862 and to Delhi in
1870. Both circumstances provided further fillip to its industry, trade and commerce.
For textiles and shawl making, there were in 1883-84 nearly 4, 000 looms in the city.
As for commerce, here is a quotation from W. S. Caine, Picturesque India (1891) :

The serai at Amritsar is one of the most interesting sights in India. . . . It is a
great open space, surrounded by small houses, in which are lodged the travelling
merchants from Central Asia. . . . Here are white-skinned Kashmiris, stout Nepalese,
sturdy little Baluchis, stately but filthy Afghans, Persians, Bokharans and Tartars, and
even the ubiquitous Chinaman. . . . These people bring to Amritsar the raw material
for the great staple manufacture of the city, the soft down, or under wools of goats
of the Great Tibet plateau and Kashmir, from which Kashmir shawls are woven. . . .
Besides the shawls of home manufacture, Amritsar is the chief emporium for those
of a similar kind made in Kashmir. . . .

Amritsar made great strides in the field of education after annexation.
According to the Settlement Report of 1852 for Amritsar Khās (i. e. the town
proper), there were (besides the centres of Sikh religious learning in various buṅgās
and ḍerās) 18 schools, 6 run by Muhammadan teachers and 12 by Brāhmaṇs,
imparting instruction to 1, 050 students. By 1882, there were in the city 132
maktabs and madarsās, 65 pāṭhshālās, 63 Gurmukhī schools and 24 Mahājanī
schools with a total number of 4, 860 pupils on their rolls. The first English school,
the Zilā School Amritsar, was opened in 1851 under a European headmaster with an
annual government grant of Rs 5, 000. Christian missionaries opened other schools,
the first of them in 1853. In 1870, the Christian Vernacular Education Society
opened a Normal School for the training of teachers. It was a declaration in 1873 by
four Sikh students of the Amritsar Mission School of their intention to embrace
Christianity which led to the rise of a Sikh movement to promote rediscovery of the
essentials of the teachings of the faith and education among the Sikh masses. It was
at Amritsar that the first Srī Gurū Siṅgh Sabhā subscribing to these twin objectives
was formed on 1 October 1873. The efforts of the Siṅgh Sabhā leaders culminated in
the establishment in 1892 of the Sikhs' premier educational institution, the Khālsā
College at Amritsar. At present the city claims a dozen colleges, including a medical
college, as also the Gurū Nānak Dev University, established in 1969 in honour of
quinquecentennial of Gurū Nānak Dev's birth. Besides, the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā
Parbandhak Committee, a statutory body representing the entire Sikh community, is
running the Shahīd Sikh Missionary College here imparting instruction in Sikh religion
and history.
In addition to incidents during the Kūkā uprise of the 1870's, what made
Amritsar politically alive was the Jalliāṅvālā Bagh massacre of 1919 (q. v.). The
Indian National Congress held its annual session of 1919 in Amritsar. October 1920
saw the rise of the Akālī or the Gurdwārā Reform movement when the Sikh saṅgat
led by Akālī leaders, Kartār Siṅgh Jhabbar and Tejā Siṅgh Bhuchchar, occupied on
behalf of the reformers the Akāl Takht, the pujārīs or officiants and the sarbarāh, i.
e. manager, appointed by the government, fleeing the holy precincts. With the
formation of the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee during the following
month, Amritsar once again became the political headquarters of the Sikhs. Since
then almost all morchās or agitations connected with the political struggle of the
Panth have been launched and conducted from the Darbār Sāhib complex where the
Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee and its political counterpart, the
Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal, have their main offices.

The growth of the city, population-wise, was irregular up to 1921. In fact, it
was negative during the decades 1881-91 (-9. 96%) and 1901-11 (-5. 96%), the
reason being the frequent epidemics and a decline in shawl trade caused by a
change in fashions in Paris and in Europe as a whole. But the decades 1921-31 and
1931-41 saw a rapid increase (+65. 30 and +47. 64 per cent, respectively). The
following decade again had a steep decline (-16. 69%), this time owing to the
partition of the Punjab, resulting in the emigration from the city of almost the entire
Muslim population to what became Pakistan after the independence of India. The
loss of Muslim population was scarcely compensated by immigrating Hindus and
Sikhs who preferred the security of the interior to settling down in a disturbed
frontier city which Amritsar had then become. With the restoration of normal
conditions, however, the population began to increase. The number recorded during
1991 Census was 7, 09, 456 including persons living in the cantonment area.
Although Amritsar was founded by the Sikh Gurūs and continued to be the most
important sacred city of the Sikhs, Sikhs formed only a minority of its population.
Before partition Sikhs in Amritsar were, according to the Census of 1931, only 12.
09% against 49. 98% Muslims and 36. 94% Hindus. Even after the partition of 1947
with almost the entire Muslim population having emigrated, the Sikhs were 34. 18%
against Hindus 64. 21% (last known figures of 1971 Census).
Population percentages notwithstanding, Amritsar still remains the holy city of
the Sikhs dotted with Sikh shrines honouring the memory of Gurūs, martyrs and
heroes. They are :
SRĪ HARIMANDAR SĀHIB. See SRĪ DARBĀR SĀHIB
AKĀL BUṄGĀ housing Srī Akāl Takht Sāhib. See AKĀL TAKHT
GURDWĀRĀ LĀCHĪ BER, a small, domed structure raised upon a marble-paved
platform near the gateway to the Harimandar, is named after the berī (jujube) tree
by its side which yields small (lāchī or cardamom-size) berries. According to
tradition, Gurū Arjan used to sit under this tree and watch the digging of the
sarovar, the sacred tank. Bhāī Sālho, a prominent Sikh of that time, also used to
relax here after the day's labour at the tank. It is said that when Mahitāb Siṅgh
Mīrāṅkoṭīā and Sukkhā Siṅgh arrived here to have the Harimandar liberated from the
control of Masse Khān Raṅghaṛ, and chastised the desecrator of the holy shrine,
they fastened their horses to this jujube tree before entering the building.
BER BĀBĀ BUḌḌHĀJĪ, is an old jujube tree standing in the parikramā or
circumambulatory terrace along the northern bank of the sacred pool. It is here that
the celebrated Bābā Buḍḍhā, entrusted with the supervision of the digging of the
tank, used to sit with his piles of digging tools and implements and other materials
used for brick lining the sarovar and later for the construction of the Harimandar. A
marble platform now surrounds the tree trunk.
GURDWĀRĀ DUKH BHAÑJAṆĪ BERĪ stands on the eastern flank of the sarovar
by the side of yet another jujube tree known as Dukh Bhañjaṇī (lit. eradicator of
suffering) Berī. The place is associated with the legend of Bībī Rajanī whose leper
husband is said to have been cured of his malady by having a dip in the old pond
which had existed here since ancient times. Gurū Rām Dās, hearing the report of
this miracle, decided to develop the reservoir into a proper bathing tank. He is

himself said to have given the tree the name Dukh Bhañjaṇī. People have a strong
faith that water in this portion of the tank will heal their ailments.
GURDWĀRĀ THAṚHĀ SĀHIB, situated in a narrow street called Bāzār Thaṛhā
Sāhib, a little way north of the Akāl Takht, commemorates Gurū Teg Bahādur's visit
to Amritsar in 1664. Soon after assuming office as Gurū, he had come from Bakālā
to pay homage at the Harimandar, but the priests in charge who belonged to the
rival Mīṇā sect shut the doors of the holy shrine in his face. Gurū Tegh Bahādur then
sat praying for some time at the spot now marked by Gurdwārā Thaṛha (lit.
platform) Sāhib and then went back towards the village of Vallā. The Gurdwārā is a
two-storeyed domed structure. The Gurū Granth Sāhib is seated on the first floor.
The ground floor which gives the look of a basement cellar has a platform and the
stump of an old tree believed to be the one under which Gurū Tegh Bahādur had
sat.
GURDWĀRĀ MAÑJĪ SĀHIB, adjacent to the eastern boundary of the compound
housing the Harimandar and the sarovar, is situated in what was formerly known as
Gurū kā Bagh (the Gurū's garden). This was the place where Gurū Arjan used to
hold the daily dīvān. A marbled platform marks the spot where the Gurū used to sit
on a mañjī (cot) with the Sikhs squatting on the ground in front. The Gurū Granth
Sāhib is seated in an adjoining room. A vast dīvān hall constructed in front of Mañjī
Sāhib during recent decades now covers the whole of the former Gurū kā Bāgh.
GURDWĀRĀ GURŪ KE MAHAL, as the name signifies, marks the residential
house of the Gurūs. It is situated west of the Akāl Takht across Gurū kā Bāzār street.
Originally constructed as a modest hut by Gurū Rām Dās in 1573, it was enlarged
and beautified by Gurū Arjan Dev and Gurū Hargobind. The old house has since
been converted into a gurdwārā with the Gurū Granth Sāhib seated in a large
rectangular hall. Besides the daily services, a special dīvān and Gurū kā Laṅgar are
held on every Sunday following the first of a Bikramī month. The most important
event of the year is the celebration of the birth anniversary of Gurū Tegh Bahādur
who was born here on Baisākh vadī 5, 1678 Bk/1 April 1621.
GURDWĀRĀ BĀBĀ AṬAL SĀHIB, a 9 storey octagonal tower, over 45 metres
high, standing close to the Kaulsar pool about 200 metres southeast of the
Harimandar, marks the spot where Bābā Aṭal Rāi, 9 year old son of Gurū Hargobind,
passed away on 9 Assū 1685 Bk/ 13 September 1628. See AṬAL RĀI, BĀBĀ. A simple
memorial in honour of Bābā Aṭal was raised on the site originally. The construction
of the present edifice commenced after the Sikh misls had established their authority
in the Punjab. The cornerstone was laid in 1770 and the first three storeys had been
completed by 1784. The upper floors were raised by Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh during
the 1820's. Sardār Desā Siṅgh Majīṭhīā contributed gold for gilding the dome at the
top. The Gurū Granth Sāhib is seated in a small inner room on the ground floor. The
first six storeys are larger than the upper ones which rise above the central sanctum.
The doors on the ground floor, four in number, are decorated with embossed
designs, on brass and silver sheets. Interior walls and the ceiling are covered with
murals depicting scenes from the lives of Gurū Nānak, his two sons and nine
successors, Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's four sons and Bābā Buḍḍhā.
In olden days, the surroundings of Bābā Aṭal Sāhib (as the building is popularly
called) were used as a cremation ground and the area was dotted with

samādhs(memorial shrines) raised for eminent sardārs (chiefs), saints (holy men),

and warriors. The shrine was taken over by the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak
Committee in August 1921. During the process of widening the parikramā, most of
the samādhs were demolished. Those surviving include the ones commemorating
Jassā Siṅgh Āhlūvālīā and Nawāb Kapūr Siṅgh.
GURDWĀRĀ MĀĪ KAULĀṄ DĀ ASTHĀN is on the bank of the Kaulsar tank, both
the tank as well as the shrine sharing the name Kaulāṅ. Kaulāṅ was, according to
tradition, the daughter (slave-girl, according to some sources) of Rustam Khān, Qāzī
of Muzaṅg, a suburb of Lahore. She was of a religious bent of mind from the very
beginning and, as she grew up, she became acquainted with the teachings of the
Gurūs and turned a devotee of Gurū Hargobind. Her father did not quite approve of
this and subjected her to the harshest treatment to dissuade her from the path she
seemed to be carving for herself. But she remained adamant and fled home to seek
refuge with Gurū Hargobind at Amritsar. Gurdwārā Māī Kaulāṅ dā Asthān, as the
name signifies, marks the site of the house where she lived. After a few years she
shifted to Kartārpur, near Jalandhar, where she died in 1629. The tank Kaulsar was
got excavated by Gurū Hargobind for Kaulaṅ's convenience. It was rain-fed and
remained neglected until desilted, cleaned and renovated in 1872 and connected to
the haṅsli, or water channel bringing waters of the River Rāvī to the Amritsar
sarovars, in 1884.
GURDWĀRĀ RĀMSAR stands on the bank of the Rāmsar sarovar, near
Chāṭīviṇḍ Gate, on the southeastern side of the walled city. After the completion of
the Harimandar, Gurū Arjan undertook the compilation of Ādi Granth, the Holy Book,
now revered as Gurū Granth Sāhib. For this task, he chose a secluded site. The spot
selected was then a shady nook, one km away from the bustle of the town. To make
the surroundings more agreeable, he had a tank dug which was named Rāmsar after
Gurū Rām Dās. Here, Gurū Arjan composed his famous Sukhmanī, the Psalm of
Peace, and with Bhāī Gurdās as his scribe compiled the Ādi Granth during 1603-04.
The present Gurdwārā Rāmsar, a small marble-lined hall topped by a gilded, fluted
lotus dome built in 1855, marks the site of the Gurū's labours.
GURDWĀRĀ BIBEKSAR stands on the eastern flank of the tank Bibeksar got
dug by Gurū Hargobind in 1628 for the convenience of such pilgrims as would prefer
seclusion to the hustle and bustle of the immediate environs of the main shrine. The
Gurdwārā lies northeast of Rāmsar between Chāṭīviṇḍ and Sultānviṇḍ gates of the
walled city. The Gurdwārā was raised by Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh in 1833. The building
for Gurū kā Laṅgar and a well were added in 1905-06. The Gurdwārā was controlled
by Nihaṅgs until its management statutorily passed to the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā
Parbandhak Committee in 1925.
GURDWĀRĀ ṬĀHLĪ SĀHIB is connected with yet another sarovarSantokhsar
close to the Town Hall in the heart of the old city. Santokhsar, 148x110 metres and
next only to Amrit sarovar in size, is said to be the first tank the digging of which
was commenced by Bhāī Jeṭhā (later Gurū Rām Dās) in 1564 under the direction of
Gurū Amar Dās. But before long Bhāī Jeṭhā was called back to Goindvāl, and
Santokhsar remained half-dug until Gurū Arjan Dev completed it in 1588. It fell into
neglect during the turbulent eighteenth century and was resurrected only in 1903
after the municipal committee of Amritsar had declared it a health hazard and
threatened to fill it up. Although in 1824 it had been connected to a canal-fed

channel, orhaṅslī to make it independent of the vagaries of rainfall, the channel had
become choked with silt and the tank was turned into a receptacle for locality
garbage. A complete desilting was carried out in 1919 through kār-sevā (voluntary
free service) under Sant Shām Siṅgh and Sant Gurmukh Siṅgh. The Gurdwārā
derives its name from a ṭahlī tree, Dalbergia sisoo, of which only a stump now
remains near the main gateway. It is believed that this was the tree under which
Gurū Rām Dās and after him Gurū Arjan stood supervising the excavation of the
tank. The Gurdwārā comprising a rectangular hall on the western side of Santokhsar
sarovar is next to the Ṭāhlī Sāhib stump as one enters the walled compound
enclosing the sarovar and the shrine.
GURDWĀRĀ CHAURASTĪ AṬĀRĪ, lit. a tall house at a road crossing (chaurastā,
in Punjabi) is located by the side of a plaza at the end of Gurū kā Bāzār in the heart
of the old city. It is dedicated to Gurū Hargobind who occasionally came here to rest.
The plaza was the site of the initial encounter with an imperial force that attacked
the Gurū in 1629. The original house was demolished under the orders of the British
officials soon after the annexation of the Punjab, in order to widen the plaza. The
present building, smaller in size, has the Gurū Granth Sāhib seated on the ground
floor. Besides daily prayers, special congregations take place on the first and the
fifth day of the light half of every lunar month.
GURDWĀRĀ LOHGAṚH SĀHIB, about one km to the northwest of Harimandar,
marks the site of a fort of the same name (lit. fort of steel) constructed by Gurū
Hargobind for the defence of the town. The main battle of Amritsar between the
Gurū and an imperial force under Mukhlis Khān in May 1629 was fought here. The
present Gurdwārā stands on the ruined mound of the fort, which was razed by
Ahmad Shāh Durrānī during one of his invasions in the mid-eighteenth century. The
nearby gate in the city wall constructed by Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh is also known as
Lohgarh Gate.
GURDWĀRĀ PIPLĪ SĀHIB, about 1. 5 km west of Amritsar Railway station
towards the Khālsā College, marks the spot where a large saṅgat, column of
devotees, coming from Afghanistan and northwestern districts of the Punjab to take
part in the excavation of the main Amritsar tank was welcomed by Gurū Arjan, who
came forward personally to receive them and who subsequently made it into a
resting place for saṅgatscoming to Amritsar from that direction. The Gurdwārā is
connected by a 150 metre link road to the main Sher Shāh Sūrī Mārg near Putlīghar.
It came into prominence again in 1923 when crowds of volunteers for the kār-sevā
or desilting operation of the Darbār Sāhib tank first assembled here and then
proceeded to the work site in a procession on 17 June 1923. The Gurdwārā was
reconstructed during the 1930's. Besides the daily services, a fair is held here on the
occasion of Basant Pañchmī (January-February).
GURDWĀRĀ SHAHĪDGAÑJ BĀBĀ DĪP SIṄGH near the Chātīviṇḍ Gate of the
walled city commemorates the martyrdom of Bābā Dīp Siṅgh (q. v.) of the
Shāhīdmisl, who, coming from Damdamā Sāhib (Talvaṇḍī Sābo) in Baṭhiṇḍā district
to liberate the Darbār Sāhib, which had been attacked and desecrated by the Afghān
invaders, was mortally wounded here on 11 November 1757. Jassā Siṅgh (d. 1803)
of Rāmgaṛhīā misl raised a memorial platform on the site which was developed into
a gurdwārā by Akālī Phūlā Siṅgh (d. 1823). It was managed for long by the
descendants of Sardār Karam Siṅgh of Shahīd misl, and was handed over to the

Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee in 1924. The surrounding estate owned
by the descendants of Jassā Siṅgh Rāmgaṛhīā was also donated later to the
Gurdwārā Shahīdgañj.
GURDWĀRĀ SHAHĪDGAŇJ BĀBĀ GURBAKHSH SIṄGH, a small shrine standing
in a narrow bāzār behind the Akāl Buṅgā, commemorates the saga of heroism of
Bābā Gurbakhsh Siṅgh Nihaṅg and his twenty-nine comrades who faced a Durrānī
horde in December 1764 and fell to the last man fighting in defence of the
Harimandar.
DHARAMSĀLĀ BHĀĪ SĀLHO JĪ, near Gurdwārā Gurū ke Mahal, commemorates
the name of Bhāī Sālho (d. 1628), a devout Sikh who served Gurū Rām Dās, Gurū
Arjan, and Gurū Hargobind. Entrusted with the general administration of the nascent
town, he was popularly called kotwāl, the police chief, of Amritsar. The Dharamsālā
was his residence as well as his place of work. A nearby pond, called Bhāī Sālho's
Ṭobhā (lit. pond), was filled up by the British in 1863. The Dharamsālā has since
been converted into a gurdwārā, - a two-storeyed building topped by a gilded dome
with ancillary buildings such as Gurū kā Laṅgar and residential rooms for officiants.
GURDWĀRĀ DARSHANĪ DIOṚHĪ represents the gateway to Amritsar during its
infancy built by Gurū Arjan. As one entered the new habitation through it, paths led
to Gurū ke Mahal on the right and the Harimandar on the left with no houses in
between to obstruct a glimpse (darshan, in Punjabi) of the two holy places. Hence
the name Darshanī Dioṛhī (dioṛhī= portal or gateway). Converted into a small
gurdwārā, it now stands amidst the crowded Bāzār Māī Sevāṅ, near its junction with
Gurū kā Bāzār.
GURDWĀRĀ DAMDAMĀ SĀHIB, located between the railway line and the Sher
Shāh Sūrī Mārg about 3 km east of Amritsar railway station, is dedicated to Gurū
Tegh Bahādur who halted here for some time on his way from Amritsar to Vallā in
1664 (See Gurdwārā Thaṛhā Sāhib). Damdamā means a place for a brief halt. As the
news that the Gurū had been denied entry into the Harimandar by the Mīṇā priests
spread, the Amritsar saṅgat, mostly women, came out to see him. They went first to
the Darbār Sāhib and, learning that the Gurū had already left, they with a view to
atoning for the impudence and folly of the priests, followed him. They caught up
with him at this spot and begged his forgiveness for what had happened and
entreated him to return and visit the holy shrine with them. Gurū Tegh Bahādur
declined their request to go back, adding that he had no complaint or rancour
against anyone. He pronounced this blessing for the women : Māīāṅ rabb razāiāṅ
(Ever blessed by the Lord be the ladies). Construction of the present building of the
Gurdwārā was started in the beginning of the twentieth century by Sant Siṅgh
Kalīvāle, a trader in limestone.
Some other sacred spots in Amritsar are Har Kī Pauṛī, a flight of steps going
down to the water level behind the Harimandar; Aṭhsaṭh Tīrath, a gilded kiosk
constructed by Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh along the southern bank of the sarovar, and
Thaṛhā Sāhib, a small shrine between Aṭhsaṭh Tīrath and Ber Bābā Buḍḍhā Jī
commemorating Gurū Amar Dās and Gurū Arjan.
Besides spots and shrines sacred to the Sikhs, Amritsar has many other places
of interest, the better known among them being the Durgiāṇā Mandir, a Hindu

temple built during the 1930's on the model of the Golden Temple; Jalliāṅvālā Bāgh,
the site of the tragedy of 13 April 1919; Gobindgaṛh Fort constructed by Mahārājā
Raṇjīt Siṅgh; and Rām Bāgh gardens and palace where Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh used
to put up during his frequent visits to the city.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Twārīkh Srī Amritsar [Reprint]. Amritsar, 1977
Ṭhākar Siṅgh, Giānī, Srī Gurduāre Darshan. Amritsar, 1923
Tārā Siṅgh, Srī Gur Tīrath Saṅgrahi. Amritsar, n. d.
Kirpāl Siṅgh, Giānī, "Srī Amritsar Shahir, " in the Gurdwārā Gazette. November
1988
Pratāp Siṅgh, Giānī, Amritsaru Sifatī dā Gharu. Amritsar, 1977
Datta, V. N. , Amritsar Past and Present. Amritsar, 1967
Madanjit Kaur, The Golden Temple : Past and Present. Amritsar, 1983
Patwant Singh, The Golden Temple. Delhi, 1988
Arshi, P. S. , Sikh Architecture in the Punjab. Delhi, 1986
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

AMRITSAR KHĀLSĀ DIWAN, See KHĀLSĀ DĪWĀN, AMRITSAR

ANABHĪ, a Jain hierarch, who, according to Purātan Janam Sākhī, met Gurū Nānak
during his journey to the South. Anabhī addressed the Gurū thus : "Eatest thou corn,
old or new, consumest thou parched gram, and drinkest thou cold water without
filtering to ensure absence of living organisms; yet thou art called a Gurū. What
merit dost thou possess if thou art constantly killing living beings?" Gurū Nānak,
according to Purātan Janam Sākhi, recited verses saying :" By the Master's grace is
faith fulfilled, " and not by "having the hair of one's head plucked, drinking befouled
water and begging others for leftovers to eat. " Anabhī, says the Janam Sākhi, took
the precept and became a disciple.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Vīr Siṅgh, Bhāī, Gurū Nānak Chamatkār. Amritsar, 1928
Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Panth Prakāsh [Reprint]. Patiala, 1970
Gurnek Siṅgh

ANAHATA-ŚABDA figures variously in the Gurū Granth Sāhib as anahada-sabad,
anahada-tūrā, anahada-jhunkāra, anahada bain, anahada-nāda, anahada bāṇīand
anahada-dhunī and in the Dasam Granth asanāhada-bāṇīandanāhada-bājā. The
word anahata is from the Sanskrit language. It occurs in Pāli and Prākrit texts as
well. In the Sanskrit original, it implies unstruck; it stands for pure or immaculate in
Pāli and for eternal in the Prākrit. The suffix words like sabad orśabda, tūrā,
jhuṇkāra, bāṇī and dhunī stand for word, rhythm, sound or speech. Thus, anahataśabda would mean the unstruck or pure or eternal sound. In a theistic system,
anahata-śabda would signify an eternal voice symbolizing the reality of God. Indeed,
Kabīr uses the word anahata as an epithet of God who is of the form of Light (joti
sarūpā anahata ) . This interpretation is paralleled in Gurū Nānak's Japu where he
refers to God, the Creator, as the original, the pure, the beginningless and the
eternal (ādi anīlu anādi anāhati). The Gurūs have employed almost all the technical
terms of Tantra and Haṭhayoga first used by the siddhas, nāthas and yogīs, but they
have, at the same time, re-evaluated and reinterpreted these doctrines and
practices. However, the former were neither theistic in outlook nor bhaktic in
practice : their path was chiefly that of ascetic yogīs. On the other hand, Sikhism
believes in the non-dual dynamic reality realizable through bhakti or loving devotion.
Thus, the concept of anahata-śabda in Sikhism had to be understood in the light of
the Sikh concept of Reality which cannot be realized through tāntrik or haṭhayoga
methods, but through nām-simran, i. e. constant remembrance of His Name - harī kī
kathā anāhad bānī (GG, 483). In the Sikh ontological view, this mystic sound
(anahati-śabda) has no meaning if it does not relate to the glory of God. The use of
tāntrik and haṭhayogic terminology has to be given a theistic and devotional content
to understand it fully in the Sikh context. In Sikhism, the mystic sound in itself is not
of much significance, but what matters is the source of this sound. Unlike
thehaṭhayogīs who believed that the source of this sound (nāda or śabda) is the
kuṇḍalinī passing through the suṣumnā, the Sikh scripture declares that he who
strikes the instrument and produces the sound is no other than God. It is the
constant mindfulness of God (nām simran) which has to be made the life-breath
(prāṇa-pavana) of the devotee; controlling his left and right nerves (iḍāand piṅgalā),
he cultivates the central nerve (suṣumnā), and then starts the reverse process by
turning the life breath upwards. When this life-breath made by nām-simran passes in
the reverse order through the suṣumnā, it pierces all the six plexuses on its upward
march and it then settles in the void (ulṭat pavan chakra khaṭu bhede surati sunn
anarāgī - GG, 333). The Gurūs are not concerned with the details of nāḍīs, cakras,
and kuṇḍalinī; their central concern is to bear the eternal sound signalling the
omnipresence of the Almighty. When this is achieved, by the grace of God
(gurprasādi) the self realizes its innate nature spontaneously(sahaja subhāi), enjoys
the innate bliss (sahaja-sukha), becomes free(nirmalā) of all impurities, merges into
the emptiness trance (sunna-samādhi) and attains supreme peace (nirbāṇ-pada)
which characterizes the fourth station (chauthā pada). It is not necessary to stress
that the anahata-śabda heard by the released sages is not a physical sound to be
heard with the physical ears. One has to 'kill' one's sinful existence and live an
immaculate existence called jīvan-mukti; then alone can one hear the anahada-bāṇī.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
Eliade, Mircea, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom. Princeton, 1969
2.
Bhattacharya, Haridas, The Cultural History of India. Calcutta, 1969
3.
Jodh Siṅgh, The Religious Philosophy of Guru Nanak. Varanasi, 1983
4.
Chaturvedī, Parasūrām, Uttarī Bhārat kī Sant Pramprā. Allahabad, 1963
L. M. Joshi

ANAK SIṄGH, warrior son of Bhāī Manī Rām, resident of the village of 'Alīpur, district
Multān (now in Pakistan), received baptismal rites at Anandpur at the time of the
initiation of the Khālsā, on 30 March 1699, and took part in the battles of
Nirmohgaṛh and Anandpur. As says Gurū kīāṅ Sākhīāṅ, he fell a martyr in the battle
of Chamkaur fought on 7 December 1705.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Padam, Piārā Siṅgh, and Giānī Garjā Siṅgh, eds. , Gurū kīāṅ Sākhīāṅ Patiala,
1986
Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Twārīkh Gurū Khālsā. Patiala, 1970
Gupta, Hari Ram, History of the Sikhs, vol. I. Delhi, 1983
Piārā Siṅgh Padam

ANAND (Skt. Anand, from nand meaning "to rejoice" or "to delight") denotes
mystical experience, spiritual bliss or a state of consciousness such as that of a jīvan
mukta, i. e. one released while still in body. Anand in the Upaniṣadic texts is taken to
be one of the three inherent attributes of ātman or Brahman, the other two being
sat and chit. In the Taittirīya Upaniṣad(II. 1--5), it acquired this meaning of pure
bliss. The self at the lowest or first stage of its evolution is defined as the annamaya
koṣa (the matter) which evolves successively into prāṇa (life), man (mind or
perceptual consciousness), vijñāna (self-consciousness) and ānanda, non-dual bliss.
In Sikh theology too, anand is one of the attributes of the Supreme Self; so it
can be the state of the individual soul as well. Gurū Amar Dās's composition Anandu,
in the measure Rāmkalī, gives an exposition of the experience of anand, of the union
with the immaculate Hari attained through absorption in nām, i. e. repetition of
Divine Name. Gurū Arjan attests that he has seen with his own eyes-nain aloiā-that
the Supreme Self is anand rūpu, i. e. bliss itself, is anandamay, full of bliss (GG,
387). Gurū Arjan further declares that the Lord of Nānak, the Supreme Being, who is
the cause of causes and is antaryāmī (the inner guide), experiences bliss-anand
karāi (GG, 387). Gurū Amar Dās prefaces his poem Anandu with the affirmation that
the experience of anand comes only through meeting with the true Gurū and fully
imbibing his instruction. He says that the longing for experiencing anand is inherent
in men and is universal-ānandu ānandu sabhu ko kahai (GG, 917), but it actually
falls to the lot of the very few, for it cannot be had without the grace of the Gurū
which destroys sins, touches one's eye with the collyrium of true knowledge (giān
añjanu sāriā), cuts asunder the knot of attachment (mohu) and bestows a sublime
way of living, sabadu savāriā. These are essential conditions to experiencing anand.
In the concluding stanza, Gurū Amar Dās says that anand is liberation from all
suffering. It brings one complete fulfilment, and is realized by listening to the Divine
word. Then all sorrow, sickness and pain end.
Anand is not an intermediate state in the journey of the individual self towards
the Supreme Self, but the unitive one. The Gurū is the sole guide and remembrance
of the Name is the sole discipline or sādhnā. Grace of the lord acts as the initial
inspiration as well as the final arbiter.
Gurū Nānak, in Japu, has signified anand as the state of being nihāl or fulfilled;
Gurū Arjan, in Sukhmanī as the state of sukh or peace; Gurū Tegh Bahādur, in his
ślokas, as the state of the giānī, the enlightened one who has achieved sahaj or
equipoise and Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, in his verse, as the state of the heroic and
dedicated one whose joy or anand is in philanthropic action and sacrifice. Gurū
Nānak summing up the entire theme of the Japu says in the last stanza that the
glance of grace of the Lord makes one nihāl, fulfilled or blessed.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Kohli, Surindar Singh, A Critical Study of Adi Granth. Delhi, 1961
Tāran Siṅgh, Sahij te Anandu. Amritsar, n. d. .
Caveeshar, Sardūl Siṅgh, Sikh Dharam Darshan. Patiala, 1969
Tāran Siṅgh

ANAND, BĀBĀ, was the second son of Bābā Mohrī and a grandson of Gurū Amar
Dās. He received his name from the Gurū himself who also uttered a long hymn in
Rāmkalī measure calling it Anandu. The hymn has since formed an important part of
Sikh liturgy. Bābā Anand lived up to the time of the Sixth Gurū, Gurū Hargobind
(1595-1644), who held him in high esteem. He once sent messengers, with a
palanquin, to escort Bābā Anand to Kīratpur. The Gurū himself came out to receive
him as he arrived. Offerings were heaped up before him by the Gurū as well as by
the saṅgat. Bābā Anand, however, declined saying, "You are the Gurū - the same as
Gurū Nānak and his successors. You alone are competent to receive offerings. I shall
not touch them. "
Bābā Anand returned to Goindvāl where he spent the rest of his days. The
palanquin in which he travelled is still kept as a relic at Goindvāl.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Gurbilās Chhevīṅ Pātshāhī. Patiala, 1970
Bhallā, Sarūp Dās, Mahimā Prakāsh. Patiala, 1971
Macauliffe, Max Arthur, The Sikh Religion. Oxford, 1909
Gupta, Hari Ram, History of the Sikhs, vol. I. Delhi, 1973
Balbīr Siṅgh Dil

ANAND KĀRAJ, lit. joyful ceremonial occasion or proceedings is the name given the
Sikh marriage ceremony. For Sikhs married state is the norm and the ideal; through
it, according to their belief, come the best opportunities for serving God's purpose
and the well-being of humanity, and it affords the best means of fulfilment of
individuality and attainment of bliss. Sikhism repudiates mockery, vows of celibacy,
renunciation or the sannyāsin state. Unlike in the West, most marriages among
Sikhs, as also in India as a whole, are arranged. It is regarded as a duty for the
parents to arrange for and actively contribute towards the marriage of their
offspring. Prem Sumārag, an eighteenth century work on Sikh social code, lays
down:
When a girl attains maturity, it is incumbent upon her parents to look for a
suitable match for her. It is neither desirable nor proper to marry a girl at tender
age. The daughter of a Sikh should be given in marriage to a Sikh. If a man is a
believer in Sikhism, is humble by nature, and earns his bread by honest means, with
him matrimony may be contracted without a question and without consideration for
wealth and riches. If he be a God-fearing man, the parents should marry their
daughter to him upon God's faith. God willing, their daughter will have all happiness
and her parents will reap great satisfaction. . . whatever arrangements the parents
make for a marriage these should be well within their means. They should not
imitate ostentatious people. This is incumbent upon both sides. One who conducts
the ceremony of marriage should not accept any gratification for it.

Similarly, Sikh Rahit Māryādā, manual of Sikh conduct and custom issued by
the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee, statutorily elected representative
society of the Sikhs, prescribes marriage of a Sikh girl only to a Sikh male without
consideration of caste or sub-caste. It prohibits child marriage, permits widow
remarriage, and enjoins that a Sikh marriage must be performed under Anand
marriage rites. The Anand Marriage Act, 1909, (q. v.) gives legal recognition and
validates marriages solemnized following this ceremony. Section 2, the operative
part of the Act, reads:
All marriages which may be or may have been duly solemnised according to
the Sikh Marriage ceremony called Anand shall be and shall be deemed to have been
with effect from the date of the solemnisation of each respectively good and valid in
law.
The history of Anand marriage ceremony is traced back to the time of Gurū
Amar Dās (1479-1574), who composed the long 40-stanza hymn Anandu, in the
Rāmkalī measure, suitable to be sung or recited on all occasions of religious import.
His successor, Gurū Rām Dās, composed a four stanza hymn, Lāvāṅ which is recited
and sung to solemnize nuptials. During the time of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh and his
successors, however, this ceremony fell into partial disuse under renewed
Brāhmaṇical influence at court as well as in society. The Niraṅkārī reform movement
of the mid-19th century made the practice of Anand ceremony a vital plank in its
programme as did the later, more widely influential Siṅgh Sabhā. But there was
opposition from the Ārya Samājīs and Brāhmaṇ priestly classes, the former anxious
to prove that the Sikhs were but a sect of the Hindus and hence subject to Hindu
Law, and the latter apprehensive of a reduction in their clientele and income. The

Sikh form of wedding ceremonial eventually received legal sanction through the
Anand Marriage Act which was adopted in 1909. The ceremony is now universally
observed by the Sikhs.
According to Sikh Rahit Maryādā, a formal engagement or betrothal prior to
marriage is not absolutely necessary, but if the parties so desire, the betrothal
ceremony takes place usually at the boy's residence where a few near relations of
the girl go with some gifts, sweets and fruit. The gifts may include a ring or kaṛā and
kirpān for the prospective groom. They are handed over to him in the presence of
relations, collaterals and friends assembled usually in saṅgat in the presence of Gurū
Granth Sāhib. The eatables include a chhuhārā (dried date) of which the boy takes a
bite signifying acceptance of the match as well as of the gifts. This ceremony
concludes with sirvārnā (money waved around the head of the boy in offering, given
away thereafter in charity) and ardās (liturgical supplicatory prayer).
Actual wedding takes place at the girl's residence. The date of the wedding is
set by mutual consultation to suit both parties. Astrological or horoscopic
considerations are discountenanced in Sikh calculations. Matters such as the
strength of the barāt (the bridegroom's party), timing of arrival and departure,
duration of stay, are also decided mutually so that the bride's parents may make
suitable arrangements. Before setting out, the bridegroom may go to a gurdwārā to
make obeisance and offer ardās before the Gurū Granth Sāhib. On arrival at the
house of the girl's parents, the party is received by the girl's parents, relations and
friends outside the house with the chanting of hymns of welcome and ardās followed
by milnī or for meeting of the two families, customarily restricted to the fathers (or
guardians) and maternal uncles of the boy and the girl. Barāt is then escorted inside
for refreshments after which anand kāraj takes place either in a gurdwārā or under a
marquee in the presence of the Gurū Granth Sāhib. This purely religious part of the
proceedings commences with kīrtan, singing of hymns, as the guests and hosts
assemble in saṅgat. The couple to be wed sit facing the Gurū Granth Sāhib, the
bride on the left of the bridegroom. Any Sikh chosen to conduct the ceremony will
officiate. He will say a short opening ardās seeking felicity for the bridegroom and
the bride, their respective parents or guardians only standing for this ardās with the
rest of the saṅgat remaining seated. The choir will then sing a short hymn from the
Gurū Granth Sāhib. Translated, the hymn would read :
Call upon God for task thou wouldst have accomplished,
He will bring the tasks to rights, so witnesseth the Gurū.
In the company of the holy thou shalt rejoice and taste only nectar,
Thou art the demolisher of fear, thou art compassionate, O' Lord,
Nānak singeth the praises of the Incomputable Lord.
(GG, 91)

The officiant may then give a sermon addressed especially to the couple to be
explaining the significance of Sikh marriage and the duties and obligations of
husband and wife towards each other and towards their families, community and
society in general. Marriage in Sikhism, he tells the couple-to-be, is not merely a civil
or social contract but a union of the souls and rests upon mutual love and loyalty,
mutual understanding and adjustment. A verse from Gurū Amar Dās, Nānak III, is
often quoted : "They are not husband and wife who but sit side by side with each
other; only they are truly wedded who personify one single soul in two bodies" (GG,
788).
After the sermon the girl's father places one end of a scarf, usually saffron or
pink in colour, in the groom's hand, passing it over his shoulder and placing the
other end in the bride's hand, signifying that he had entrusted her to his protection.
The musicians then sing another short hymn:
Praise and slander have I all ceased to relish, O Nānak,
False, I count all other relationships,
To the fold of Thy fabric am I now affianced.
(GG, 963)

The Gurū Granth Sāhib is then opened at page 773 and the first stanza of the

Lāvāṅ quartet is read from it. The same stanza is then sung by the choir while the

couple slowly and reverentially circumambulate the Holy Book, Gurū Granth Sāhib,
clockwise, the bridegroom leading and the bride following, both continuing to hold
their ends of the scarf throughout. They bow together before the Gurū Granth Sāhib
before rising up for the circumambulation and again before resuming their seats on
completing it. This process is repeated for each of the remaining three stanzas. The
ceremony is concluded with the customary singing of the first five and the
concluding hymn of Anandu followed by ardās, in which the whole congregation
joins; vāk or hukam (reading a verse from Gurū Granth Sāhib opened at random) is
then received and Kaṛāhprasād, the Sikh sacrament, distributed.
read:

Translated into English the Lāvāṅ quartet or the Sikh epithalamium would
1. By the first nuptial circuiting
The Lord showeth ye His
Ordinance for the daily duties of
wedded life:
The Scriptures are the Word of the
Lord,

Learn righteousness, through them,
And the Lord will free yefrom sin.
Hold fast to righteousness,
Contemplate the Name of the Lord,
Fixing it in your memory as the
scriptures have prescribed.
Devote yourselves to the Perfect and
True Gurū.
And all your sins shall depart.
Fortunate are those whose minds
Are imbued with the sweetness of
His Name,
To them happiness comes without effort;
The slave Nānak proclaimeth
That in the first circling
The marriage rite hath begun.
2. By the second nuptial
circumambulation
Ye are to understand that the
Lord
Hath caused ye to meet the True
Gurū,
The fear in your hearts has
departed;
The filth of selfness in your minds

is washed away,
By having the fear of God and by
singing His praises
I stand before Him with reverence,
The Lord God is the soul of the
universe!
There is naught that He doth not
pervade.
Within us and without, there is
One God only;
In the company of saints
Then are heard the songs of
rejoicing.
The slave Nānak proclaimeth
That in the second circling
Divine Music is heard.
3. In the third roundabout
There is a longing for the Lord
And detachment from the world.
In the company of the saints,
By our great good fortune,
We encounter the Lord.
The Lord is found in His purity
Through His exaltation,
Through the singing of His
hymns.

By great good fortune we have
risen.
In the company of the saints
Wherein is told the story
Of the Ineffable Lord.
The Holy Name echoes in the
heart :
Echoes and absorbs us.
We repeat the Name of the Lord,
Being blessed by a fortunate destiny
Written from of old on our
foreheads.
The slave Nānak proclaimeth
That in the third circling
The love of God has been awakened in
the heart.
4. In the fourth walk-around
The mind reaches to knowledge
of the Divine
And God is innerly grasped:
Through the Grace of the Gurū
We have attained with ease to the
Lord;
The sweetness of the Beloved
Pervades us, body and soul.
Dear and pleasing is the Lord to

us:
Night and day our minds are fixed on Him.
By exalting the Lord
We have attained the Lord:
The fruit our hearts desired;
The Beloved has finished His
work.
The soul, the spouse, delighteth in the Beloved's Name.
Felicitations fill our minds;
The Name rings in our hearts:
The Lord God is united with His
Holy Bride.
The heart of the Bride flowers
with His Name.
The stave Nānak proclaimeth
That in the fourth circling
We have found the Eternal Lord.
(GG, 773-74)

This is the religious part of the ceremony. Behind it and ahead lies a whole
labyrinth of spectacular custom and rite. The dual sources of significance of Sikh
marriage as an institution are : first, the doctrinal rules of the Sikh religious
community, which are a few in number but universal in scope and intent; and
second, the traditional usages or customs of the Punjabi ethno-linguistic community
which are very many but confined to a particular social structure and associated with
a particular territory or locality. The prescribed marriage ritual, the anand kāraj, is an
expression of the basic principles of the faith. It was first given statutory recognition
and thus officially and legally distinguished from the observances sanctioned under
Hindu Customary Law, by the Anand Marriage Act of 1909. According to Sikh rules,
religious endogamy is essential, but not endogamy within the caste or sub-caste
group. Though customary rules of exogamy are held to prohibit the marriage of near
consanguines, the precise position in this matter is difficult to determine and no

ruling on this question is included in the Sikh code of conduct. Broadly speaking, the
marriage of a person within his or her own gotra (sub-caste) is not permissible.
There is a customarily sanctioned prejudice against a woman marrying her
husband's younger brother. But all such prohibitions are of social rather than of
religious nature.
Such practices as the tying of head-bands, rituals depicting ancestor-worship,
pretended sulking or sadness, singing by professional dancing-girls, the drinking of
alcohol, burning of so-called sacred fires and similar superstitions derived from old
religious practices are completely contrary to Sikh belief.
In some parts ṭhākā is followed by another ceremony generally called chunnī
chaṛhauṇā (the offering of the head scarf). In this ceremony the boy's parents send
for the girl garments and gifts including a red thread (lāl parāndī) for plaiting the
hair, a suite of clothes, some ornaments and cash. Before the marriage, a final
engagement ceremony, known as shagan, kuṛmāī or maṅgaṇī takes place at the
home of the boy's parents, when gifts are given by the girl's parents to the boy and
to his close cognates. A chhuhārā (dried date) is offered to the boy by his would-be
father-in-law or his representatives to eat for which reason the ceremony is called in
some parts chhuhārā lauṇā. The maṅgaṇī can precede anand kāraj by months, even
years, especially when the boy and the girl get engaged at a very young age.
A series of rites takes place separately in the home of the parents of the boy
and the girl heralding nuptials. Māīeṅ paiṇā is the period of seclusion from kindred
and outsiders observed by the boy and the girl for one to three days before the
marriage. The bride and the groom refrain from bathing or changing their clothes.
During this period of ritual seclusion, the girl is not to use ornaments or cosmetics;
manual work or going out alone is also not permitted. Singing of songs by
womenfolk starts a day, or sometimes several days, before the wedding ceremony at
the homes of the girl's as well as of the boy's parents. Songs mostly from Punjabi
folklore are sung to the accompaniment of a ḍholak or drum. The songs for the
groom are called ghoṛīāṅ and those for the bride suhāg.
On the eve of the day of marriage, the bride and the groom take the ritual
bath which is called khāre chaṛhnā, ascending the (bathing) basket. This is
essentially a rite of purification following the state of seclusion. After the bath, both
the boy and the girl put on new clothes specially prepared for the occasion.
Generally these clothes are given by the respective nānake, that is, their maternal
kin group. The nānake give gifts to the girl called nānakī chhakk. These may consist
of ivory bangles, a nose ring, a suite of clothes, or a set of ornaments and some
household utensils and articles. The gifts may include clothes for the bride's parents
and siblings. Gifts from the maternal kin group are also given to the boy. These
include clothes for the groom himself, for his parents and siblings and for his
mother's brother.
Several ceremonies take place before the groom sets off for the bride's home
with the wedding party. After the ardās is recited, the boy's sister ties around his
head a circlet with a plume and gilded strings hanging in front of his face. This is the
groom's crown or sihrā. Sirvārnā (offering of money over the head of the groom) is
performed, and the money distributed among the poor. A sister of the groom, to the
accompaniment of songs, braids the mare's reins with red thread (maulī); a brother's

wife puts black antimony powder (surmā) in his eyes. Then, when all is ready, and
the mare has been fed with barley and gram, the boy's sister seizes the reins of the
mare and demands gift from her brother before allowing him to proceed. The groom
gives some money to all his sisters; this is called vāg phaṛāī (holding of the reins).
As the procession starts a younger brother or nephew of the groom, acting as best
man (sarvāhlā) is seated behind him on the mare.
Before the groom departs with the bride, first the groom's party and then the
bride's take lunch; the bride eats food provided by her parents-in-law and this is
known as sauhariāṅ dī roṭī. As the bride is about to leave her home, her mother,
female relatives and close friends came out to see her off. The band breaks into
farewell songs. The bride and the groom leave together for the home of the latter's
parents. The bride is usually accompanied by a younger brother, or traditionally, by
the village barber's wife. This ceremony of the departure of the bride from her
parents' home is known as ḍolī, a word denoting the litter which was formerly used
as transport for the couple; nowadays a decorated car is usually provided for this
purpose. As the car or carriage starts off, the father of the groom showers small
coins over it, thus expressing his happiness over the successful conclusion of the
ceremony. A basket of sweets (bhājī) , to be distributed to the groom's kin and
friends, is sent along with the bride.
The couple is ceremonially received at the entrance of the groom's family
house. Then follows the ritual of uncovering the bride's face (mūṅh vikhāī) in the
presence of the female kin, friends and neighbours of the groom. The bride is fed
with cooked dāl and rice (khichaṛī) signifying that she has become a member of her
husband's household. She removes her veil and offers obeisance to the senior
women kin who give her gifts of money after sirvārnā (revolving money around the
head).
The custom of giving a reception by the groom's parents is becoming popular
in urban society. The reception is held after the marriage ceremony. Close kin and
friends of both families are invited. A day or two later the bride usually returns to
her parental home. Only after the groom fetches her from there for the second time,
may the marriage be consummated. This second trip is called muklāvā. On this
occasion and on her subsequent visits to her parents' home, her parents give her
gifts of clothes and ornaments. The word dāj denotes the gifts given at the time of
the marriage to their daughter and to the groom's parents by the bride's parents.
The gifts given to the bride by the groom's parents are called varī. Besides, giving
the dowry, consisting of all the things that the bride will need to set up a household
- clothes, ornaments, utensils, furniture and beddings - the bride's parents
undertake expenses on the marriage ceremony, feasting, illuminations, etc. All this is
not to be taken as constituting the Sikh marriage, but is the general practice in
Punjabi society. Sikh reformers since the emergence of the Siṅgh Sabhā have been
urging simple and inexpensive marriages strictly in accord with the spirit of the
anand ceremony.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Sikh Rahit Maryādā. Amritsar, 1975
Randhīr Siṅgh, ed. , Prem Sumārag Granth. Jalandhar, 1965
Jogendra Siṅgh, Sikh Ceremonies. Chandigarh, 1968

4.
5.

Teja Siṅgh, Sikhism : Its Ideals and Institutions. Bombay, 1938
Cole, W. Owen, and Piara Singh Sambhi, The Sikhs : Their Religious Beliefs
and Practices. Delhi, 1978
J. P. S. Uberoi
Teenā Hazoorīā
Noel Q. King

ANAND MARRIAGE ACT was passed in 1909 by the Imperial (i. e. GovernorGeneral's) Legislative Council to establish legal "validity of the marriage ceremony
common among the Sikhs called Anand. " The origins of marriage by Anand
ceremony go back to early Sikhism. The practice which somewhat lapsed during the
time of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh was sought to be revived as part of the religious
reform initiated by the Niraṅkārī movement and followed up especially by the Siṅgh
Sabhā. Anand marriages were readily reported in the Sikh Press towards the close of
the 19th century. For instance, the Khālsā Akhbār in its issue of 6 November 1886
reported the marriage of Bhāī Dalīp Siṅgh, son of Bhāī Raṇ Siṅgh of village Koṇḍī in
the princely state of Paṭiālā by Anand ceremony. The same newspaper announced
on 11 December 1886 Anand nuptials of Giān Siṅgh, son of Sūbahdār-Major Baghel
Siṅgh, which took place at the village of Jaipurā. Again on 18 February 1888, the
Khālsā Akhbār reported the marriage of the daughter of Bhāī Sant Siṅgh, president,
Siṅgh Sabhā, Lahore, performed in accordance with the Sikh ritual on 14 February
1888. At Siālkoṭ, an early Anand marriage of modern times took place on 4 June
1903 (Khālsā Akhbār, l0 July 1903). Bhāī Mohan Siṅgh Vaid in his Diary recorded
that he attended Anand Kāraj - performed at the village of Kairoṅ on 7 June 1899.
Presumably that was when Bhāī Nihāl Siṅgh Kairoṅ's daughter, sister of Partāp Siṅgh
Kairoṅ, mighty latter-day political leader of the Punjab, was married. Early
references to Anand marriages occur in old Sikh texts such as Rahitnāmā Bhāī Dayā
Siṅgh and Giānī Giān Siṅgh, Panth Prakāsh.
The Anand ceremony was looked upon askance by Brāhmaṇical priests who
administered the rites in the old Hindu fashion. They started caluminating the Sikh
form. Sikhs wished to have their social laws accepted and codified and a beginning
was made with their marriage rites.
The Anand Marriage Bill was introduced in the Imperial Legislative Council in
1908 by Ṭikkā Ripudaman Siṅgh of the princely state of Nābhā. The House of Nābhā
had always espoused simplification of wedding ceremonies and, as reported in
Khālsā Dharam Prachārak, 13 July 1895, there was an order in force in Nābhā state
laying down that no marriage party should exceed 11 guests. The Anand Marriage
Bill had been drafted by a committee of the Chief Khālsā Dīwān. The Imperial
Council referred the bill to a select committee. The bill received overwhelming
support from the Sikh respondents. In 1909 Sundar Siṅgh Majīṭhīā replaced Ṭikkā
Ripudaman Siṅgh of Nābhā state as a member of the Imperial Council. Moving the
bill at a meeting of the Imperial Legislative Council held at the Viceregal Lodge,
Shimlā, on Friday, 10 September 1909, Sundar Siṅgh Majīṭhīā commended the effort
of Ṭikkā Ripudaman Siṅgh who had "laboured unremittingly" in behalf of the "useful
measure. " Elaborating, Sundar Siṅgh said the ceremony called Anand was initiated
by the third Gurū of the Sikhs, Gurū Amar Dās (1479-1574), and his successor Gurū
Rām Dās (1534-1581) was the author of the four hymns of Lāvāṅ which are included
in the Gurū Granth Sāhib (Rāga Sūhī, pp. 773-74) and which are recited to
solemnize the Anand ceremony.
Sardār Sundar Siṅgh presented the report of the select committee. The bill was
placed on the Statute Book on 22 October 1909.
The text of the Act reads :

The Anand Marriage Act 1909, Act No. VII of 1909. An Act to remove doubts
as to the validity of the marriage ceremony among the Sikhs called 'Anand'.
Short title and
extent

The Act may be called the Anand Marriage Act 1909.

Validity of Anand
Marriages

All marriages which may be or may have been duly
solemnized according to the Sikh marriage ceremony
called 'Anand' shall be and shall be deemed to have been
with effect from the date of solemnization to each
respectively, good and valid in law.

Exemption of
3. certain marriages
from Act :

Nothing in this Act shall apply to (a) any marriage
between persons not professing the Sikh religion or (b)
any marriage which has been judicially declared to be null
and void.

Saving of marriage
solemnized
4.
according to other
ceremony

Nothing in this Act shall affect the validity of any marriage
duly solemnized according to any other marriage
ceremony customary among the Sikhs.

Non-validation of
marriages

Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to validate any
marriage between persons who are related to each other
in any degree of consanguinity or affinity which would,
according to the customary law of Sikhs, render a
marriage between them illegal.

1.

2.

5.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Talwar, K. S. , “The Anand Marriage Act, " in The Panjab Past and Present.
Patiala, October 1968
Bajwa, Fauja Singh, Kuka Movement. Delhi, 1965
Soḍhī, Tejā Siṅgh, Anand Prakās. Amritsar, 1967
K. S. Talwār

ANAND SIṄGH, RĀI (d. 1827), vakīl or agent of the Sikh kingdom, belonged to the
famed Bhaṇḍārī family of Baṭālā founded by Bhāg Mall, a wealthy adventurer. In
1809, Anand Siṅgh was appointed an agent of the Sikh Darbār at Ludhiāṇā, the
British military station and political agency. He was later sent as the Darbār's envoy
to the British resident at Delhi. He had a good knowledge of Persian and English and
accompanied Sir Charles Metcalfe on the successful expedition against Bharatpur
undertaken by Lord Combermere in January 1826, receiving on his return from
Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh the title of Rāi with a robe of honour. Rāi Anand Siṅgh died in
1827.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Sūrī, Sohan Lāl, 'Umdāt-ut-Twārīkh. Lahore, 1885-89
Griffin, Lepel, and C. F. Massy, Chiefs and Families of Note in the Punjab.
Lahore, 1909
Ahluwalia, M. L. , ed. , Select Documents Relating to Maharaja Ranjit Siṅgh's

Negotiations with the British Envoy Charles Theophilus Metcalfe 1808-1809.
Delhi, 1982

B. S. Nijjar

ĀNANDGHANA, SVĀMĪ, an Udāsī sādhū known for the commentaries he wrote on
some of the Sikh scriptural texts. Not much biographical detail is available about
him, but references in his own works indicate that he was a disciple of Bābā Rām
Dayāl, an Udāsī ascetic; also, that he was born into the family of Gurū Nānak, tenth
in descent from him. Since his first ṭīkā, a commentary on the Japu, was completed
in 1852 Bk/AD 1795, it may be presumed that he was born around the middle of the
eighteenth century. He spent the early years of his life at Ḍerā Bābā Nānak where
he was born. A wall-painting in a shrine there shows him sitting on a carpet, rosary
in hand, facing his spiritual mentor, Rām Dayāl. At some stage he was sent for
higher learning to Kāshī (Vārāṇasī) where he stayed for about ten years. At Kāshī, he
frequently engaged in learned debate with the Paṇḍits, trying to establish the
supremacy of the Gurūs' word over other philosophical systems. He seems to have
spent the last years of his life at Ḍerā Bābā Nānak. Of his works, a manuscript
containing commentaries on Japu, Āratī, Siddha Goṣṭi and Anandu is preserved in
the Punjab State Archives, Paṭiālā, under No. M/691. The manuscript is divided into
two parts---the first comprising 228 folios contains commentaries on Japu and Āratī
and the second comprising 112 folios contains commentaries on Siḍḍha Goṣtī and
Anandu. Another manuscript copy of these four ṭikās is also available in the
Languages Department, Punjab, Paṭiālā. These four commentaries were, according
to internal evidence, written at Kāshī between AD 1795 and 1802. Ānandghana's ṭikā
or commentary on Āsā dī Vār, references to which occur in his commentaries on
Siḍḍha Goṣṭi (1857 Bk/AD 1800) and Anandu (1859 Bk/AD 1802), was held at the Dr
Balbir Siṅgh Sāhitya Kendra at Dehrā Dūn, and has recently been published (1990)
by Punjabi University, Paṭiālā. The only known manuscript copy of his sixth
commentary Oaṅkār was available at the Sikh Reference Library, Amritsar, until the
collection perished in the Army attack on the Golden Temple premises in 1984.
Ānandghana's technique of writing commentary is that of a symposium.
Wherever an important point is to be explained, he follows the question-answer
format. He is well conversant with the tools of exposition, and writes with conviction.
He is argumentative and at places prolix. The language used is old Hindi which is not
exempt from the influence of his native Punjabi. Ānandghana's commentary on Gurū
Nānak's Japuwhich he completed in Bk/1852/AD 1795 is considered to be his
masterpiece and a representative work of the Udāsī school. It is available in two
recensions-one exhaustive and the other abridged. Whereas the latter recension
limits itself to an exposition of the text, the former contains considerable
supplementary material on old Indian philosophical systems and religious practices in
which context the commentator attempts to highlight the teaching of Gurū Nānak.
He is however not chary of casting aspersions upon other commentators whom he
declares to be "dunces". This led Bhāī Santokh Siṅgh, the Nirmalā scholar to write
his own commentary on the Japu challenging the interpretations advanced by
Ānandghana. He called his commentary Garabgañjanī Ṭīkā (q. v.), i. e. tikā to
humble the garab or pride (of Ānandghana). Whereas the interpretations of
Ānandghana have a colouring peculiar to the Saguna school of Bhaktī, Santokh
Siṅgh in keeping with the Nirmalā tradition leans on the side of Vedānta.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
Nripinder Singh, The Sikh Moral Tradition. Delhi, 1990
2.
Santokh Siṅgh, Bhāī, Garabgañjanī Tīkā [Reprint]. Delhi, 1961
3.
Jaggi, R. S. , ed. , Gurbāṇī Ṭike : Ānandghana. Patiala, 1970
4.
Āsā dī Vār dā Ṭikā. Patiala, 1990
Rattan Siṅgh Jaggī

ANANDPUR (31º-13'N, 76º-32'E), lit. City of Bliss, is situated on one of the lower
spurs of the Śivālik range in Ropaṛ district of the Punjab. Connected to the rest of
the country by rail and road, it lies 31 km north of Ropaṛ (Rūp Nagar) and 29 km
south of Naṅgal Township. Being one of the supremely important pilgrimage centres
of the Sikhs, it is reverently called Anandpur Sāhib. Takht Srī Kesgaṛh Sāhib, one of
the five Takhts (lit. thrones) or seats of highest religious authority for Sikhs, and
several other holy shrines are located here. Having been the abode of the last two
Gurūs of the Sikhs for two score years, the town was witness to many a momentous
event of Sikh history.
The foundation of Anandpur was laid by Gurū Tegh Bahādur (1621-75), Nānak
IX, on 19 June 1665, on a piece of land, covering the ruined mound of an older
village, Mākhovāl, which the Gurū had earlier purchased for this purpose from the
Rājpūt hill state of Kahlūr (Bilāspur). He named the new habitation Chakk Nānakī
after his mother, and shifted here with his family from Kīratpur, 8 km south of it. But
soon after, he set out on his extensive travels across the eastern parts. The
development of Chakk Nānakī was thus interrupted till after his return in 1672. The
small habitation then grew into a flourishing town frequented by devotees from the
Punjab and elsewhere. In May 1675, a group of Brāhmaṇs from Kashmīr came to the
Gurū with their tale of woe. The burden of their submission was the religious
persecution and forcible conversion which were the order of the day in Kashmīr
under its Mughal governor. Gurū Tegh Bahādur resolved to go to Delhi, the Imperial
capital, to have their grievance remedied, or to lay down his life in the cause of
religious freedom. Naming his young son, Gobind Dās (Later, Siṅgh), hardly nine
years of age, his spiritual successor, he set out on the journey, preaching the holy
word in towns and villages he passed through. In Delhi, he was taken into custody,
tortured and executed publicly under the orders of Emperor Auraṅgzīb in the
Chāndnī Chowk on 11 November 1675.
Back at Chakk Nānakī, the young successor, Gurū Gobind Siṅgh (1666-1708),
received and cremated with exemplary courage and composure the severed head of
his father, brought at great personal risk by a daring Sikh, Bhāī Jaitā. As he grew up,
Gurū Gobind Siṅgh assumed a soldierly style which aroused the envy of the local
ruler, Rājā Bhīm Chand of Kahlūr. To avoid an early conflict, Gurū Gobind Siṅgh,
accepting an invitation from the chief of another hill state, Sirmūr, to visit him, left
Chakk Nānakī in 1685 to stay at Pāoṇṭā on the bank of the Yamunā. After the battle
of Bhaṅgāṇī (18 September 1688) fought against the combined force of Rājpūt hill
monarchs, he returned to Chakk Nānakī, which he now renamed Anandpur after one
of a ring of forts (Anandgaṛh) which he, apprehending further trouble from the hill
rājās, now undertook to raise. The forts were Kesgaṛh, in the centre and Anandgaṛh,
Lohgaṛh, Holgaṛh, Fatehgaṛh and Tārāgaṛh around it. Bhīm Chand and his son,
Ajmer Chand of Kahlūr, had not shed their chagrin over the defeat they had suffered
at Bhaṅgāṇī at the hands of the Gurū, although the latter had helped them in the
battle of Nadauṇ (1691) against a Mughal general sent against them by the
governor of Jammū. They made an alliance with the Kaṭoch ruler of Kāṅgṛā and
several other chiefs, attacking Anandpur more than once, but each time Gurū
Gobind Siṅgh repulsed their onslaught.
On Baisākhī day, 30 March 1699, Gurū Gobind Siṅgh carried out the supreme
task of his career converting the saṅgat into Khālsā. Instructions had been sent out

during the previous year to saṅgats, or Sikh communities, in various parts not to
recognize any longer the masands as the Gurū's representatives and to come to
Anandpur for the following Baisākhī festival in large numbers. They had also been
asked to come, where practicable, mounted. On the appointed day a massive
assembly took place in the Fort of Kesgaṛh at Anandpur. As all sat rapt in the
morning service, Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, according to one of the earlier sources, Kuir
Siṅgh, Gurbilās Pātshāhī 10, made a dramatic appearance, a naked sword in his
hand, and asked if any one of the assembly would be willing to offer his head to
him. The audience were benumbed to hear this strange demand . Gurū Gobind
Siṅgh repeated his call twice. At the third call, one Dayā Rām, a Khatrī from Lahore,
offered himself. The Gurū took him into an adjoining enclosure. After a while he
returned, his sword dripping blood, and asked for another head. This time, Dharam
Dās, a Jaṭ from Hastināpur, came forward and was led to the enclosure as had been
his predecessor. Likewise, three other disciples, Mohkam Chand, a washerman from
Dvārkā, Himmat, a water carrier from Jagannāth, and Sāhib Chand, a barber from
Bidar, in the South, offered themselves. The fear of the saṅgat turned to amazement
and wonder when, soon after, the Gurū led the five back, all dressed alike in saffron
coloured gowns with neatly tied turbans on their heads and swords dangling by their
sides. Gurū Gobind Siṅgh administered to the Five vows of baptism, giving them five
palmsful of amritor sweetened elixir sanctified by recitation over it of holy hymns
and stirred with a steel khaṇḍā, double edged sword, and introduced them to the
saṅgat as his pañj piāre, Five Beloved. He announced that with the baptism of the
Pañj Piāre he had inaugurated the Khālsā, a brotherhood of holy soldiers who would
be distinguised by five symbols all beginning with the letter k', viz. kes (uncut hair),
kaṅghā (comb), kachchhā (pair of shorts), kaṛā (steel bracelet) and kirpān (sword).
The khālsā were vowed to live up to the highest moral and ethical standards and to
be ever ready to fight tyranny and injustice. They were to recognize no distinctions
of caste, creed or status. The Gurū himself stood up before the Paňj Piāre and
begged with folded hands to be admitted to their ranks. Several thousands followed
on that and on subsequent days to receive the rites of initiation by the double-edged
sword. Anandpur thus became the birthplace of the Khālsā. It is known commonly as
Khālse dī vāsī (Home of the Khālsā).
The emergence of the Khālsā caused panic among the chiefs of the
surrounding hill principalities and they planned together strategy to dislodge the
Gurū from Anandpur. They sent to him emissaries who assured him on oath that
they would forever cease troubling him and his Sikhs if only he would temporarily
leave his citadel and move out of the town. At the same time, they secretly sought
armed assistance from the Mughal faujdār of Sirhind in order to encircle Anandpur
and force the Gurū out of the town. Gurū Gobind Siṅgh left Anandpur but, still
suspicious of the rājās' intentions, encamped at the village of Hardo Namoh, 4 km
south of Kīratpur, taking up a tactically viable defensive position. He was attacked by
the hill chiefs from the north and by the Mughal contingents equipped with cannon
from the south. These attacks, which according to Bhaṭṭ Vahīs took place on 7, 12
and 13 October 1700, were repulsed and on 14 October, Gurū Gobind Siṅgh and his
Sikhs broke the cordon and crossed the River Sutlej into Basohlī, a small chiefship
friendly with the Gurū. This action is known as the battle of Nirmohgaṛh. As soon as
the imperial troops withdrew, the Gurū reoccupied Anandpur. The hill chiefs then
waited upon Emperor Auraṅgzīb and warning him of the new danger that the rise of
the Khālsā spelt for his kingdom, entreated him to take some severe measures.
Himself critically engaged in dealing with the Marāṭhā insurrection in the South, the

emperor ordered the governor of Lahore and the faujdār of Sirhind to act in this
behalf in concert with the hill chiefs. A combined force marched upon Anandpur and
laid siege to the town in May 1705. The Gurū and his Sikhs withstood their repeated
assaults for several months despite scarcity of provisions resulting from the
prolonged blockade. The besiegers were eventually tired out and offered on solemn
oath safe exit to the Gurū and the Sikhs if they evacuated Anandpur. Gurū Gobind
Siṅgh along with his family and men left the town during the night of 5-6 December
1705.
Before departing, the Gurū directed one of his Sikhs, Gurbakhsh, an Udāsī by
faith, to stay behind to look after the local saṅgat and the shrines, especially the one
commemorating the site where Gurū Tegh Bahādur's head had been cremated.
Years later, as the situation permitted, Gulāb Rāi and Shyām Siṅgh, sons of Gurū
Gobind Siṅgh's first cousin, Dīp Chand, who had since the evacuation of Anandpur
taken refuge with the friendly Rājā of Nāhan, came back. Gulāb Rāi purchased the
town of Anandpur from the Rājā of Bilāspur and pretending to be a successor to
Gurū Gobind Siṅgh established his own religious seat, remonstrances from
Gurbakhsh Udāsī notwithstanding. All the four sons of Gulāb Rāi had predeceased
him. His widow managed the affairs for some time, but soon died having
bequeathed the gaddī to Soḍhī Surjan Siṅgh, a grandson of Shyām Siṅgh. After the
conquest of the Punjab by the Sikhs, several rulers and chiefs made rich
endowments to the shrines which continued to be managed by the local Soḍhī family
until the rise of the Gurdwārā reform or the Akālī movement in the early 1920's. The
shrines at Anandpur were occupied by the Akālīs on 12 January 1923; they were
formally handed over to the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee by the local
Soḍhīs on 15 March 1923. The historic shrines are now managed by the Shiromaṇī
Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee Amritsar, through a manager appointed by it. The
Jathedār of Takht Srī Kesgaṛh Sāhib is an ex-officio member of the Shiromaṇī
Committee. The shrines are :
TAKHT SRĪ KESGAṚH SĀHIB is the principal shrine at Anandpur. Resplendent
in its white marble glory, the shrine stands on a hillock and marks the site of the
Kesgaṛh Fort where the historic Baisākhī congregation of 1699 had taken place. The
present complex was constructed during 1936-44 under the supervision of Sant Harī
Siṅgh Kahārpurī. Being on a slope, the complex has two levels protected by retaining
walls on the sides. On the lower level, approached by a flight of steps is the
imposing two-storeyed gateway, offices, and a 30-metre square courtyard. The level
on which stands the main building is 2. 5 metres higher than the courtyard. The 16metre square hall with a balcony in front contains within it the sanctum, a 5. 5 metre
square room in which some old weapons preserved as sacred relics from the time of
Gurū Gobind Siṅgh are displayed on a low platform. The Gurū Granth Sāhib is seated
under a canopy outside the sanctum, above which rises a fluted lotus dome topped
by a tall ornamental pinnacle of gilded metal, and a gilded khaṇḍā as a finial. On the
roof, corners of the hall and the balcony are adorned with domed kiosks. Gurū kā
Laṅgar is on the lower level behind the central building. The lower slopes of the
Kesgaṛh hill are covered with rows of residential rooms for staff and pilgrims. This
complex is collectively known as Dashmesh Nivās. A 55-metre square dīvān hall,
about 150 metres east of the central building, was added during the 1980's to cater
for large congregations on festival occasions. A sarovar or bathing tank, 80-metre
square, in a walled compound is situated at ground level to the west of the Takht
Sāhib and close to the Ropaṛ-Naṅgal road. The relics placed in the inner sanctum of

Takht Srī Kesgaṛh Sāhib include a khaṇḍā, a kaṭār (dagger), a saif (double-edged
straight tapering sword), a muzzle-loading musket, a spear known as karpā barchhā,
and a nāgaṇī (a kind of spear with a twisted and pointed blade). Another set of
weapons also believed to have once belonged to Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, which had
been taken away by the British to England after the occupation of the Punjab in
1849 and which had been brought back from there at the time of the celebration of
the 300th birth anniversary of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh in 1966-67 are now on display
here.
GURWDĀRĀ QILĀ ANANDGAṚH SĀHIB is situated on another spur, about 800
metres southeast of Takht Srī Kesgaṛh Sāhib. It is a newly constructed building
though marks of the old, original structure are also still traceable. The present
building complex was raised during the 1970's by Sant Sevā Siṅgh (d. 1982) whose
successors are now managing and further developing it. Earlier, during the 1930's,
Kartār Siṅgh Kalāsvālīā had got a fort-like building constructed which is still intact on
top of the hillock. The present Gurdwārā, separated from this building by a spacious
terrace paved with slabs of streaked marble, is a 15-metre square hall with an 8x3
metre porch in front. The 6-metre square sanctum within the hall has above it a
lotus dome topped with a gilded pinnacle and khaṇḍa as a finial. The entire wall
surface has a facing of streaked marble. This building was completed in 1970. The
water level of an old bāolī, a stepped well 4-metre in diametre, is approached
through a covered passage. The bāolī has 135 marbled steps. At the lower levels on
the eastern flank of the main building are a spacious hall for Gurū kā Laṅgar
constructed in 1972, and 300 rooms for pilgrims and administrators.
GURDWĀRĀ QILĀ FATEHGAṚH SĀHIB, situated on the northern outskirts of the
town of Anandpur, marks the site of another fortress bearing this name. The present
building was constructed during the late 1980's under the supervision of the
successors of Sant Sevā Siṅgh of Qilā Anandpur. The Gurdwārā is a two storeyed
domed building. In front of it is an old well which once served the needs of
Fatehgaṛh Fort.
GURDWĀRĀ QILĀ LOHGAṚH SĀHIB, one and a half kilometre southwest of
Takht Srī Kesgaṛh Sāhib, marks the site of the fort of that name constructed by Gurū
Gobind Siṅgh to protect the riverside flank. It was here that Bhāī Bachittar Siṅgh
faced and turned back a drunken elephant which the hill chiefs, during their siege of
Anandpur in 1700, had sent to batter down the gate of this fort. The present
building, octagonal in shape and three-storeyed high with a dome on top, was
constructed during the late 1980's.
GURDWĀRĀ HOLGAṚH SĀHIB stands on the site of Holgarh Fort, one and a
half km northwest of the town across the Charan Gaṅgā rivulet. It was here that
Gurū Gobind Siṅgh introduced in the spring of 1701, the celebration of holā on the
day following the Hindu festival of colour throwing, holī. Unlike the playful sprinkling
of colours as is done during holī, the Gurū made holā an occasion for Sikhs to
'demonstrate skills-at-arms in simulated battle. Holā or Holā Mahallā, became
thereafter an annual tourney of warlike sports in Anandpur as long as the Gurū
stayed there. The observance of Holā Mahallā was revived after the Sikhs had
established their rule in Punjab. It is now the biggest festival of Anandpur. The
Mahallā or the march on this occasion starting from the Takht Sāhib on the

concluding day of the week-long festival ends at Holgaṛh, where sports like fencing,
coit-throwing and tent-pegging are held.
The present building, a three-storeyed octagonal, domed edifice, was
constructed under the supervision of Sant Sevā Siṅgh and was completed in 1970.
The sanctum is in the middle of the marbled ground floor.
GURDWĀRĀ MĀTĀ JĪTO JĪ, built within a half acre enclosure just outside
Agampurā village, about 2 km northwest of Anandpur marks the site where the body
of Mātā Jīto Jī, wife of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, was cremated in December 1700. The
present three storeyed domed building was completed in 1972. The 4-metre square
sanctum marked off by four pillars is in the middle of the square hall on the ground
floor. The fluted lotus dome on top of the building has a gold plated pinnacle and a
gilded khaṇḍā as finial.
GURDWĀRĀ MAÑJĪ SĀHIB also called Damālgaṛh located close to the precincts
of Takht Srī Kesgaṛh Sāhib is dedicated to Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's sons who used this
place for learning and practising martial skills. The double-storey domed building of
the shrine stands in the middle of a 20-metre square marble paved compound. Its 3metre square sanctum is in the middle of a 15-metre square hall on the ground
floor.
GURDWĀRĀ SĪS GAÑJ SĀHIB within the town is sacred to Gurū Tegh Bahādur
whose head was cremated here in November 1675. A memorial shrine in the form of
a platform within a small room was got constructed over the ashes by Gurū Gobind
Siṅgh himself. At the time of the evacuation of Anandpur in December 1705, Gurū
Gobind Siṅgh especially entrusted it to the care of Gurbakhsh Udāsī. The renovation
and enlargement of the monument were carried out under the supervision of Bābā
Sevā Siṅgh of Anandgaṛh during the early 1970's. The original pavement in the front
compound with old Nānakshāhī bricks arranged in geometrical patterns is still intact.
The two-storey building with a pinnacled dome provides a 4. 5-metre wide covered
circumambulatory passage supported on exquisitively designed marble columns
around the inner sanctum where the Gurū Granth Sāhib is seated.
AKĀL BUṄGĀ opposite Gurdwārā Sīs Gañj within the same compound is a small
shrine housed in an old building said to have been built by a pujārī, priest, Mān
Siṅgh in 1889. It comprises a pentagonal room on either side of a masonry pedestal
on which the Gurū Granth Sāhib is seated behind glass panels. The pedestal marks
the spot sitting where during the obsequies of his father, Gurū Gobind Siṅgh
delivered a sermon to his followers.
GURDWĀRĀ DAMDAMĀ SĀHIB stands, along with Thaṛā Sāhib and Bhorā Sāhib
in the same compound, close to Sīs Gañj, formerly called Gurū ke Mahal, i. e.
residential quarters of Gurū Tegh Bahādur. Damdamā Sāhib marks the site where
the Gurū used to sit while receiving and addressing visiting saṅgats. The ceremony
of installing Gurū Gobind Siṅgh as Gurū was performed here. The present domed
octagonal building was constructed during the early decades of the 20th century.
THAṚĀ SĀHIB, an half-a-metre high and 5-metre square marble-paved
platform stands in the open space in front of Damdamā Sāhib. It was here that Gurū
Tegh Bahādur received the group of Kashmīri Paṇḍits who called on him in 1675.

GURDWĀRĀ BHORĀ SĀHIB, a three-storeyed domed building close to
Damdamā Sāhib, was a part of Gurū ke Mahal. Here in a bhorā (basement) Gurū
Tegh Bahādur used to retire for solitary meditation. A 1. 5-metre square and half a
metre high platform in the middle of the present basement marks the site of the
original bhorā. The Holy Book is now seated on a platform on the ground floor.
Extension of this Gurdwārā involving blocks for Gurū kā Laṅgar and residential
accommodation is in progress.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Trilochan Singh, Guru Tegh Bahadur : Prophet and Martyr. Delhi, 1967
Harbans Singh, Guru Tegh Bahadur. Delhi, 1982
Anand, Balwant Siṅgh, Guru Tegh Bahadur: A Biography. Delhi, 1979
Fauja Singh, and G. S. Talib, Guru Tegh Bahadur - Martyr and Teacher.
Patiala, 1975
Macauliffe, M. A. , The Sikh Religion. Oxford, 1909
Kuir Siṅgh, Gurbilās Pātshāhī 10. Patiala, 1968
Santokh Siṅgh, Srī Gur Pratāp Sūraj Granth. Amritsar, 1926-37
Ṭhākar Singh Giānī, Srī Gurduāre Darshan. Amritsar, 1923
Tārā Siṅgh, Srī Gur Tīrath Saṅgrahi. Amritsar, n. d.
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

ANANDPUR DĪ VĀR is a versified account in Punjabi, by one Rām Siṅgh, of a battle
fought in 1812 between Soḍhī Surjan Siṅgh of Anandpur and Rājā Mahā Chand of
Kahlūr. Soḍhī Surjan Siṅgh was a lineal descendant of Sūraj Mall, a son of Gurū
Hargobind. His father, Nāhar Siṅgh, who was a brave and influential person, had
established an independent state by force of arms. Surjan Siṅgh, too, was a man of
prowess, and was increasing his area of influence. Mahā Chand, the chief of the
neighbouring state of Kahlūr, was jealous of the growing power of Surjan Siṅgh
whom he considered no more than a vassal of his. He sent him word demanding
land revenue from him. The Soḍhī refused saying that he was an autonomous ruler
in his territory. Rājā Mahā Chand led a force against him and a fierce battle ensued.
The poem describes the action in some detail. Surjan Siṅgh received help from
Sardār Hukmā Siṅgh, about whose identity no exact information is supplied by the
poet. The invading troops were defeated and they fled leaving a large number of
dead on the field. According to the poet, Bhāī Sukkhā Siṅgh, author of Gurbilās
Dasvīṅ Pātshāhī and Bhāī Māhṇā Siṅgh, the Jathedār of Srī Kesgaṛh Sāhib, took part
in this battle. From the minute details of the combat and of the feats displayed by
some of the contestants, the poet seems to have been an eye witness to the whole
campaign.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ashok, Shamsher Siṅgh, ed. , Prachīn Jaṅg Nāme. Amritsar, 1950
Piārā Siṅgh Padam

ANANDPUR SĀHIB RESOLUTION, a frequently invoked document of modern Sikhism
pronouncing its religious rule as well as its political goal. After having enjoyed power
under chief ministers, Gurnām Siṅgh and Parkāsh Siṅgh Bādal in the Punjab, newly
demarcated in 1966, Sikhs as represented by their premier political party, the
Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal, were able to capture only one seat at the elections to Indian
Parliament (1971) from among the 13 which were Punjab's portion. In the Punjab
Assembly elections which took place in March 1972 their tally was a mere 24 seats
out of a total of 117, and the Punjab Government passed into the hands of the
Congress Party, with Giānī Zail Siṅgh (later, President of India) as chief minister.
This electoral debacle led to self-introspection on the part of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal
which appointed on 11 December 1972 a sub-committee to reflect upon the situation
and to proclaim afresh the programme and policies of the Dal. The 12-member
committee consisted of Surjīt Siṅgh Barnālā, Gurcharan Siṅgh Ṭauhṛā, Jīwan Siṅgh
Umrānaṅgal, Gurmeet Siṅgh, Dr Bhagat Siṅgh, Balwant Siṅgh, Giān Siṅgh Rāṛewālā,
Amar Siṅgh Ambālavī, Prem Siṅgh Lālpurā, Jaswinder Siṅgh Brāṛ, Bhāg Siṅgh, and
Major General Gurbakhsh Siṅgh of Badhaṇī. The first meeting of the sub-committee
took place at Amritsar. The venue then shifted to Chaṇḍigaṛh where the committee
completed its task in ten successive meetings. Counsel was available to the subcommittee of the celebrated Sikh intellectual and thinker, Sardār Kapūr Siṅgh, whose
impress the draft emerging finally from its deliberations carried. The document was
adopted unanimously by the working committee of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal at a
meeting held at Anandpur Sāhib, town sacred to Gurū Gobind Siṅgh, also reverenced
by Sikhs as the birthplace of the Khālsā. Since it was adopted at Anandpur Sāhib
(October 16-17, 1973) the resolution came to be known as the Anandpur Sāhib
Resolution. It was endorsed in the form of a succession of resolutions at the 18th
All-India Akālī Conference of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal at Ludhiāṇā on 28-29 October
1978. An English version of the resolution is quoted below :
Whereas, the Sikhs of India are a historically recognized political nation ever
since the inauguration of the Khālsā in AD 1699, and
Whereas, this status of the Sikh nation had been internationally recognized and
accepted by the major powers of Europe and Asia, viz. France, England, Italy,
Russia, China, Persia (now Iran), Afghanistan, Nepal, and the Company Bahadur,
Fort William, Calcutta, till the middle of the 19th century, and again by the outgoing
British as well as by the Hindu dominated Congress and the Muslim League of India
in the middle of the 20th century, and
Whereas, the brute majority in India, in 1950, imposed a constitutional
arrangement in India which denudes the Sikhs of their political identity and cultural
popularity, thus liquidating the Sikhs politically and exposing them to spiritual death
and cultural decay leading inevitably to their submergence and dissolution into the
saltish sea waters of incoherent Hinduism, and
Whereas, the Sikhs have been thus shackled and enslaved in unethical and
cynical repudiation of solemn and binding commitments and public promises earlier
made to the Sikhs, while the Sikh representatives in the Indian Constituent
Assembly, in 1950, refused to affix their signatures to the official copy of the Indian
Constitutional Act thus promulgated, the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal in the name and on
behalf of the Sikhs proclaims that the Sikhs are determined, by all legitimate means,
to extricate and free themselves from this degrading and death dealing situation so

as to ensure firmly their honourable survival and salvage their inherent dignity within
India and their birthright to influence meaningfully the mainstream of world history.
The Sikhs therefore demand, firstly, that an autonomous region in the north of India
should be set up forthwith wherein the Sikh interests are constitutionally recognized
as the fundamental State policy. Secondly, that this autonomous region includes the
present Punjab, Karnāl and Ambālā districts of Haryāṇā, inclusive of Kāṅgṛā district
of Himāchal Pradesh, Chaṇḍigaṛh, Pinjore, Kālkā, Dalhousie, Nālāgaṛh Desh, Sirsā,
Gūhlā and Ratīā areas and Gaṅgānāgar district of Rājasthān, thus bringing main
contiguous Sikh population and Sikh habitats within this autonomous Sikh region as
an integral part of the Union of India, and, thirdly, this Sikh autonomous region may
be declared as entitled to frame its own internal constitution on the basis of having
all powers to and for itself except Foreign Relations, Defence, Currency and General
Communications which will remain subjects within the jurisdiction of the Federal
Indian Government.
"MAY THE RIDER OF THE BLUE HORSE HELP US. "

A. BASIC POSTULATES
1. The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal is the very embodiment of the hopes and
aspirations of the Sikhs and as such is fully entitled to its representation. The basic
postulates of this organization are human co-existence, human welfare and the
ultimate unity of all human beings with the Lord.
2. These postulates are based upon the three great principles of Srī Gurū
Nānak Dev Jī, namely nām japo, Kirat Karo, and vaṇḍ chhako, i. e. meditation on
God's Name, honest labour, and sharing the fruits of this labour with the needy.
B. PURPOSES
The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal shall ever strive to achieve the following aims:
1. Propagation of Sikhism, its ethical values and code of conduct to combat
atheism.
2. Preservation and keeping alive the concept of distinct and sovereign identity
of the Panth and building up of appropriate conditions in which the national
sentiments and aspirations of the Sikh Panth will find full expression, satisfaction and
facilities for growth.
3. Eradication of poverty and starvation through increased production and
more equitable distribution of wealth as also the establishment of a just social order
sans exploitation of any kind.
4. Vacation of discrimination on the basis of caste, creed or any other ground
in keeping with the basic principles of Sikhism.
5. Removal of disease and ill health, checking the use of intoxicants and
provision of full facilities for the growth of physical well-being so as to prepare and

enthuse the Sikh Nation for the national defence. For the achievement of the
aforesaid purposes, the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal owned it as its primary duty to inculcate
among the Sikhs religious fervour and a sense of pride in their great socio-spiritual
heritage through the following measures :
5.1 Reiteration of the concept of unicity of God, meditation on His Name,
recitation of gurbāṇī, inculcation of faith in the ten holy Sikh Gurūs as well as in Gurū
Granth Sāhib and other appropriate measures for such a purpose.
5.2 Grooming at the Sikh Missionary College the Sikh youth with inherent
potential to become accomplished preachers, rāgīs, ḍhāḍīs and poets so that the
propagation of Sikhism, its tenets and traditions and its basic religious values could
be taken up more effectively and vigorously.
5.3 Baptising the Sikhs on a mass scale with particular emphasis on schools
and colleges wherein the teachers as well as the taught shall be enthused through
regular study circles.
5.4 Revival of the religious institution of dasvandh among the Sikhs.
5.5 Generating a feeling of respect for Sikh intellectuals including writers and
preachers, who also would be enthused to improve upon their accomplishments.
Streamlining the administration of the gurdwārās by giving better training to
their workers. Appropriate steps would also be taken to maintain gurdwārā buildings
in proper condition. The representatives of the party in the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā
Parbandhak Committee would be directed to pull their weight towards these ends.
5.6 Making suitable arrangements for error-free publication of gurbāṇī,
promoting research in the ancient and modern Sikh history, translating holy gurbāṇī
into other languages and producing first-rate literature on Sikhism.
5.7 Taking appropriate measures for the enactment of an All-India Gurdwārās
Act with a view to improving the administration of the gurdwārās throughout the
country and to reintegrate the traditional preaching sects of Sikhism like Udāsīs and
Nirmalās, without in any way encroaching upon the properties of their maṭhs. .
5.8 Taking necessary steps to bring the Sikh gurdwārās all over the world
under a single system of administration with a view to running them according to
the basic Sikh forms and to pool their resources for the propagation of Sikhism on a
wider and more impressive scale.
5.9 Striving for free access to all those holy Sikh shrines, including Nankāṇā
Sāhib, from which the Sikh Panth has been separated, for their pilgrimage and
proper upkeep.
POLITICAL GOAL
The political goal of the Panth, without any doubt, is enshrined in the
Commandments of the Tenth Lord, in the pages of Sikh history and in the very heart

of the Khālsā Panth, the ultimate aim of which is the pre-eminence of the Khālsā
(KHĀLSĀ JĪ KE BOL BĀLE).
The fundamental policy of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal is to seek the realization of
this birthright of the Khālsā through the creation of a geographical entity and a
constitutional set-up of its own.
For the attainment of this aim 1. The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal is determined to strive by all possible means to
(a) Have all those Punjabi-speaking areas, deliberately kept out of Punjab,
such as Dalhousie in Gurdāspur district, Chandīgaṛh, Pinjore, Kālkā and Ambālā
Sadar, etc. in Ambālā district, the Ūnā entire tahsīl of Hoshiārpur district, Shāhābād
and Gūhlā blocks of Karnāl district, Ṭohāṇā sub-tahsīl, Ratia block and Sirsā tahsīl of
Hissār district and six tahsils of Gaṅgānagar district in Rājasthān, merged with
Punjab to constitute a single administrative unit wherein the interests of Sikhs and
Sikhism are specifically protected.
(b) In this new Punjab (as in all other states) the Centre's interference would
be restricted to Defence, Foreign Relations, Currency and Communications, all other
departments being in the jurisdiction of Punjab (and other states) which would be
fully entitled to frame their own Constitution. For the aforesaid departments of the
Centre, Punjab (and other states) would contribute in proportion to their respective
representation in Parliament.
(c) The Sikhs and other minorities living outside Punjab should be adequately
protected against any kind of discrimination against them.
2. The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal would also endeavour to have the Indian
Constitution recast on real Federal principles with equal representation at the Centre
for all the States.
3. The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal strongly denounces the Foreign policy of India as
framed by the Congress Party. It is worthless and highly detrimental to the interests
of the country, its people and mankind at large. Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal shall extend its
support only to such policies as are based upon the principles of peace and national
interest. It strongly advocates a policy of peace with all neighbouring countries,
particularly those which have within their borders Sikh population and Sikh shrines.
The Akālī Dal is of the firm view that the foreign policy of India should in no case be
one of playing second fiddle to any other country.
4. The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal shall firmly resist any discrimination against any
Sikh (or even other) employees of the Centre or State government [on the basis of
his caste or creed]. It shall also endeavour to maintain the traditional position of the
Sikhs in all the wings of the Defence services and needs of the Sikh army personnel
shall be adequately taken care of by the Panth. The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal shall also
ensure that kirpān is accepted as an integral part of the uniform of the Sikhs in the
Army.

5. It shall be the primary obligation of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal to help
rehabilitate ex-servicemen of the Defence forces in the civil life, and for such a
purpose it would extend them every help to enable them to organize themselves and
raise their voice in an effective way to gain adequate safeguards and concessions for
an honourable and dignified life.
6. The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal is of the firm opinion that all those persons,
including women, who have not been convicted of any criminal offence by a court of
law should have the right to possess any type of small arms like revolvers, guns,
pistols, rifles, carbines, etc. , without any license, the only obligation being their
registration.
7. The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal seeks ban on the sale of liquor and all other kinds
of intoxicants, and shall press for a ban on the consumption of intoxicants and
smoking in public places.
Apart from defining the basic postulates and principles of policies and its
ultimate goal, the open session of the General House of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal,
held at Ludhiāṇā, also traced the outlines of the long term socio-economic and
cultural aims and objectives of the Party, for the attainment of which it adopted
twelve sub-resolutions. A closer analysis of these sub-resolutions shows that while
the core of the basic resolutions passed by its working committee at Anandpur Sāhib
in 1973, namely the attainment of special Constitutional state for the Sikhs to ensure
their growth in accordance with their own socio-spiritual traditions and tenets was
fully endorsed by the General House of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal, the scope of the
greater autonomy to the state of Punjab for the aforesaid purpose was widened to
include all the states. Thus, the shape and scope. of the Anandpur Sāhib resolution
as it finally emerged out of the Ludhiāṇā meet of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal envisages :
1. The attainment of pre-eminence of the Khālsā through special constitutional
safeguards and powers for the Sikhs.
2. Greater autonomy to all the states by recasting the Centre - State relations
on the basis of limited powers for the Centre.
Resolutions adopted, in the light of the Anandpur Sāhib Resolution, at the open
session of the 18th All India Akālī Conference held at Ludhiānā on October 28-29,
1978, under the presidentship of Jathedār Jagdev Siṅgh Talvaṇḍī are as under:

Resolution No. I
Moved by Sardār Gurcharan Siṅgh Ṭauhṛā, President, Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā
Parbandhak Committee, and endorsed by Sardār Parkāsh Siṅgh Bādal, Chief
Minister, Punjab.
The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal realizes that India is a federal and republican
geographical entity of different languages, religions and cultures. To safeguard the
fundamental rights of the religious and linguistic minorities, to fulfil the demands of
the democratic traditions and to pave the way for economic progress, it has become
imperative that the Indian constitutional infrastructure should be given a real federal

shape by redefining the Central and State relations and rights on the lines of the
aforesaid principles and objectives.
The concept of total revolution given by Lok Nāik Jaya Parkāsh Narāiṇ is also
based upon the progressive decentralization of powers. The climax of the process of
centralization of powers of the states through repeated amendments of the
Constitution during the Congress regime came before the countrymen in the form of
the Emergency (1975), when all fundamental rights of all citizens were usurped. It
was then that the programme of decentralization of powers ever advocated by
Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal was openly accepted and adopted by other political parties
including Janata Party, C. P. I. (M), D. M. K. , etc.
Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal has ever stood firm on this principle and that is why after a
very careful consideration it unanimously adopted a resolution to this effect first at
the All-India Akālī Conference, Baṭālā, then at Anandpur Sāhib which has endorsed
the principle of State autonomy in keeping with the concept of federalism.
As such, the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal emphatically urges upon the Janatā
Government to take cognizance of the different linguistic and cultural sections,
religious minorities as also the voice of millions of people and recast the
constitutional structure of the country on real and meaningful federal principles to
obviate the possibility of any danger to the unity and integrity of the country and,
further, to enable the states to play a useful role for the progress and prosperity of
the Indian people in their respective areas by a meaningful exercise of their powers.

Resolution No. 2
This momentous meeting of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal calls upon the
Government of India to examine carefully the long tale of the excesses, wrongs,
illegal actions committed [against the Sikhs] by the previous Congress Government,
more particularly during the Emergency, and try to find an early solution to the
following problems:
(a) Chaṇḍīgaṛh originally raised as a Capital for Punjab should be handed over
to Punjab.
(b) The long-standing demand of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal for the merger in
Punjab of the Punjabi,- speaking areas, to be identified by linguistic experts with
village as a unit, should be conceded.
(c) The control of headworks should continue to be vested in Punjab and, if
need be, the Reorganization Act should be amended.
(d) The arbitrary and unjust Award given by Mrs. Indira Gandhi during the
Emergency on the distribution of Rāvī-Beās waters should be revised on the
universally accepted norms and principles, and justice be done to Punjab.
(e) Keeping in view the special aptitudes and martial qualities of the Sikhs, the
present ratio of their strength in the Army should be maintained.

(f) The excesses being committed on the settlers in the Tarāī region of the
Uttarāñchal Pradesh in the name of Land Reforms should be vacated by making
suitable amendments in the ceiling law on the Central guidelines.

Resolution No. 3
(Economic Policy Resolution)
The chief sources of inspiration of the economic policies and programme of the
Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal are the secular, democratic and socialistic concepts of Gurū
Nānak and Gurū Gobind Siṅgh. Our economic programme is based on three basic
principles :
(a) Dignity of labour.
(b) An economic and social structure which provides for the uplift of the poor
and depressed sections of society.
(c) Unabated opposition to concentration of economic and political power in
the hands of the capitalists.
While drafting its economic policies and programme, the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal in
its historic Anandpur Sāhib Resolution has laid particular stress on the need to break
the monopolistic hold of the capitalists foisted on the Indian economy by 30 years of
Congress rule in India. This capitalist hold enabled the Central government to
assume all powers in its hands after the manner of Mughal imperialism. This was
bound to thwart the economic progress of the states and injure the social and
economic interests of the people. The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal once again reiterates the
Sikh way of life by resolving to fulfil the holy words of Gurū Nānak Dev :
"He alone realizes the true path who labours honestly and shares with others
the fruits of that labour. "
This way of life is based upon three basic principles :
(i) Doing honest labour.
(ii) Sharing with others the fruits of this labour, and
(iii) Meditation on the Lord's Name.
The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal calls upon the Central and the State governments to
eradicate unemployment during the next ten years. While pursuing this aim, special
emphasis should be laid on ameliorating the lot of the weaker sections, scheduled
and depressed classes, workers, landless and poor farmers and urban poor.
Minimum wages should be fixed for all of them.
The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal urges upon the Punjab government to draw up such
an economic plan for the state as would turn it into the leading state during the next
ten years by raising per capita income to Rs. 3, 000 and by generating an economic
growth rate of 7% per annum as against 4% at the national level.

The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal gives first priority to the redrafting of the taxation
structure in such a way that the burden of taxation is shifted from the poor to the
richer classes and an equitable distribution of national income ensured.
The main plank of the economic programme of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal is to
enable the economically weaker sections of the society to share the fruits of national
income.
The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal calls upon the Central government to make an
international airport at Amritsar which should also enjoy the facilities of a dry port.
Similarly, a Stock Exchange should be opened at Ludhiāṇā to accelerate the process
of industrialization and economic growth in the State. The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal also
desires that suitable amendments should be made in the Foreign Exchange rules for
free exchange of foreign currencies and thereby removing the difficulties being faced
by the Indian emigrants.
The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal emphatically urges upon the Indian government to
bring about parity between the prices of the agricultural produce and that of the
industrial raw materials so that the discrimination against such states as lack these
materials may be removed.
The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal demands that the exploitation of the producers of cash
crops like cotton, sugarcane, oil seeds, etc. , at the hands of traders should be
stopped forthwith and for this purpose arrangements be made for purchase by
government of these crops at remunerative prices. Besides, effective steps should be
taken by government for the purchase of cotton through the Cotton Corporation.
The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal strongly feels that the most pressing national problem
is the need to ameliorate the lot of millions of exploited persons belonging to the
scheduled classes. For such a purpose the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal calls upon the Central
and State governments to earmark special funds. Besides, the state governments
should allot sufficient funds in their respective budgets for giving free residential
plots both in the urban and rural areas to the Scheduled Castes.
The Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal also calls for the rapid diversification of farming. The
shortcomings in the Land Reforms Laws should be removed, rapid industrialization of
the State ensured, credit facilities for the medium industries expanded and
unemployment allowance given to those who are unemployed. For remunerative
farming, perceptible reduction should be made in the prices of farm machinery like
tractors, tubewells, as also of the inputs.

Resolution No. 4
This huge gathering of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal regrets the discrimination to
which the Punjabi language is being subjected in the adjoining States of Himāchal,
Haryāṇā, Jammū and Kashmīr, Delhi, etc. It is its firm demand that in accordance
with the Nehrū Language Formula, the neighbouring States of Punjab should give
'second' language status to Punjabi because fairly large sections of their respective
population are Punjabi-speaking.

Resolution No. 5

The meeting regrets that against the 'claims' of the refugees who had migrated
to Jammū and Kashmīr as a result of the partition of the country, no compensation
had been provided to them even after such a long time and these unfortunate
refugees have been rotting in the camps ever since then. This Akālī Dal session,
therefore, forcefully demands that their claims should be settled soon and immediate
steps should be taken to rehabilitate them even if it involves an amendment to
section 370 of the Constitution.

Resolution No. 6
The 18th session of the All-India Akālī Conference takes strong exception to
the discrimination to which the minorities in other states are being subjected and the
way in which their interests are.
being ignored.
As such, it demands that injustice against the Sikhs in other states should be
vacated and proper representation should be given them in government service,
local bodies and state legislatures, through nominations, if need be.

Resolution No. 7
The 18th session of the All-India Akālī Conference notes with satisfaction that
mechanization of farming in the country has led to increase in the farm yield and as
a result the country is heading towards self-sufficiency in foodgrain.
However, the session feels that poor farmers are unable to take to
mechanization because of the enormity of the cost involved.
As such, the Shiromaṇi Akālī Dal urges upon the Government of India to
abolish the excise duty on tractors, so that with the decrease in their prices, the
smaller farmers may also be able to avail themselves of farm machinery and
contribute to increase in agricultural produce of the country.

Resolution No. 8
This conference of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal appeals to the Central and State
governments to pay particular attention to the poor and labouring classes and
demands that besides making suitable amendments in the Minimum Wages Act,
suitable legal steps be taken to improve the economic lot of the labouring class, to
enable it to lead a respectable life and play a useful role in the rapid industrialization
of the country.

Resolution No. 9
This session seeks permission from the Government of India to install a
broadcasting station at the Golden Temple, Amritsar, for the relay of Gurbāṇī Kīrtan
for the spiritual satisfaction of those Sikhs who are living in foreign lands.
The session wishes to make it clear that the entire cost of the proposed
broadcasting project would be borne by the Khālsā Panth and its over all control

shall vest with the Indian Government. It is hoped that the Government would have
no hesitation in conceding this demand after due consideration.

Resolution No. 10
This mammoth gathering of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal strongly urges upon the
Government of India to make necessary amendments in the following enactments
for the benefit of the agricultural classes who have toiled hard for the sake of larger
national interests :
1. Hindu Succession Act be suitably amended to enable a woman to get rights
of inheritance in the properties of her father-in-law instead of the father's.
2. The agricultural lands of the farmers should be completely exempted from
the Wealth Tax and the Estate Duty.

Resolution No. 11
This vast gathering of the Shiromaṇī Akālī Dal strongly impresses upon the
Government of India that keeping in view the economic backwardness of the
scheduled and non-scheduled castes, provisions proportionate to their population
should be made in the budget for utilization for their welfare. A special ministry
should be created at the Centre as a practical measure to render justice to them on
the basis of reservation.
The session also calls upon the government that in keeping with the settlement
already made, no discrimination should be made between the Sikh and Hindu
Harijans in any part of the country.

Resolution No. 12
The Congress government is called upon to vacate the gross injustice,
discrimination done to Punjab in the distribution of Rāvī-Beās waters. The Central
government must also give approval for the immediate establishment of six sugar
and four textile mills in Punjab so that the State may be able to implement its agroindustrial policy.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Gurmit Singh, History of Sikh Struggles, vol. I. Delhi, 1989
Gopal Singh, A History of the Sikh People. Delhi, 1979
Mahārājā Amrinder Siṅgh

'ANANDU, noncanonically spelt Anand, by Gurū Amar Dās, is like Gurū Nānak's Japu,
one of the more familiar texts in the Gurū Granth Sāhib. Set in the Rāmkalī musical
measure and comprising forty stanzas, Anandu is recited liturgically, especially in its
shortened form, at the conclusion of all congregational services and at prayers
offered at weddings and other ceremonies to seek God's grace and solace and to
rejoice on happy occasions in the favours granted by Him. The Sikh marriage
ceremony itself has come to be called anand, which term has also been used in the
legislative enactment governing the custom. Tradition recounts that Gurū Amar Dās
had just finished the recording of this composition when the news of the birth of a
grandson (son of Mohrī, the younger of his two sons), was communicated to him.
The child was named Anand after the title of the composition he had just completed.
In Sanskrit, and so in Punjabi, the word anand means bliss. In the Taittirīya
Upaniṣad, it has been used for Brahman Itself. The term there also denotes a rasa
or emotion. Gurū Amar Dās's composition centres upon the experience of anand
(bliss, supreme beatitude) resulting from the individual soul's merging with the
Supreme Soul which is attained through constant remembrance of God under the
direction of the Gurū. Herein, anand is a positive spiritual state of inner poise and
equanimity wherein one is freed from all dukkha (suffering), roga (malady), and
santāpu (anxiety) and one realizes the ultimate goal of union with the Lord.
A synoptic summary of the contents of the poem, stanza-wise, may go as
under : (1) Anand is attained by the grace of the Gurū who has bestowed upon me
enlightenment, equanimity, harmony and God-realization; (2) God has banished
suffering, giving me the sense of fulfilment; (3) He bestows upon men all gifts
including the gift of the Name; (4) the Name sustains life, banishes desires, gives
peace, tranquillity and happiness; (5) it drives away the five lusts and cancels death;
(6) the gift of the Name follows and it can come from Him alone; (7) the Gurū is the
source of anand, for his teaching gives detachment and discrimination and banishes
sin; (8) without the Gurū's guidance one gropes in the darkness of ignorance; (9)
the Gurū leads the seeker to the company of the holy saints where the Immaculate
One is meditated upon; (10) thus the mind gets detached from illusory māyā, the
enchanter; (11) it surrenders itself to God, the Eternal Reality; (12) God, Creator, is
beyond comprehension; (13) even the angels and ṛṣis are the seekers of the nectar
of His Name which banishes ego and sin; (14) the bhaktas tread the path of non-ego
and non-desire; (15) men do what God wills, some by His grace take to meditating
on the Name; (16) they on whom is His grace listen to the Gurū's word; (17) they
become pure by meditating on the Name, liberating their companions as well; (18)
doubt and ignorance are dispelled by meditating on the Name alone and not by any
ritual practices; one remains in impurity as long as doubt persists; (19) an impure
mind can never win liberation; (20) they who practise what the Gurū teaches are
pure inside and outside; (21) a disciple has to surrender completely to the Gurū by
shaking off his ego and placing full faith in him; (22) none can achieve liberation
without the Gurū's aid; (23) he has to concentrate on the True Gurū's word and this
is possible by His grace only; (24) all other learning is of little avail; (25) the Gurū's
śabda is a pure diamond which one receives through His grace alone; (26) the Gurū
breaks the bondage of māyā and thus frees the spirit; (27) the Smṛtis and Śāstras
cannot pierce māyā; (28) the Gurū teaches concentration on the Name which is
one's protector and sustainer; (29) māyā charms one away from concentration; (30)
māyā is worthless whereas the Name is priceless; (31) those who concentrate on the
Name build up real capital; (32) the taste of the Name is sweetest and it eliminates
all desire; (33) the Name is the divine spark within the bodily frame; (34) its

realization gives bliss and annuls sorrow and suffering; (35) blessed is the man who
is devoted to the Gurū and God; (36) blessed are the eyes which see God
everywhere; (37) blessed are the ears which hear the nectar-sweet Name; (38)
blessed is the realization of the state wherein one sees God in all His vastness; (39)
of highest value is the Truth which abides in the pure hearts; and (40) with the
realization comes anand or bliss which banishes suffering, maladies and anxieties.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Tāran Siṅgh, Sahij te Anandu. Amritsar, n. d.
Kohli, Surindar Singh, A Critical Study of Adi Granth. Delhi, 1961
Talib, Gurbachan Singh, Bani of Guru Amar Das. Delhi. 1979
Macauliffe, M. A. , The Sikh Religion. Oxford, 1909
Tāran Siṅgh

ANANTĀ, BHAĪ, son of Bhāī Kuko, a Vadhāvan Khatrī, was a devoted Sikh of the
time of Gurū Hargobind (1595-1644). According to Bhāī Santokh Siṅgh, Srī Gur
Pratāp Sūraj Granth, he once earned the Gurū's displeasure for wantonly hitting a
crow which became lame as a result of the injury. He was, however, repentant and
was pardoned through Bhāī Bidhī Chand's intercession. Bhāī Anantā laid down his life
fighting for the Gurū in the battle of Amritsar (1629).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Santokh Siṅgh, Bhāī, Srī Gur Pratāp Sūraj Granth. Amritsar 1926-37
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

ANANTĪ, MĀTĀ, wife of Bābā Gurdittā and mother of Gurū Har Rāi, Nānak VII. She
was popularly known as Mātā Nattī. Some chroniclers have also used for her the
names of Nihāl Kaur and Bassī.

See NATTĪ, MĀTĀ
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Santokh Siṅgh, Bhāī, Srī Gur Pratāp Sūraj Granth. Amritsar, 1926-37
Major Gurmukh Siṅgh (Retd.)

ANANTNĀG (33º-44'N, 75º-13'E), a district town on the southern edge of the
Kashmīr valley, is named after a nearby spring which is regarded as sacred by the
Hindus. The town claims a historical Sikh shrine commemorating the visit of Gurū
Nānak (1469-1539), who passed through here on his way to Maṭṭan in 1517. The
present building of Gurdwārā Gurū Nānak in the southern part of the town was
constructed in 1950, and a second storey was added to it in 1970. The dīvān hall,
with the sanctum along the middle of the rear wall, is in the central portion of the
first floor. The Gurdwārā is affiliated to the Jammū and Kashmīr Gurdwārā
Parbandhak Board and is managed by its district committee for Anantnāg.
Gurnek Siṅgh

ANĀRKALĪ, the oldest Mughal tomb in Lahore, was built between 1605 and 1615 by
Emperor Jahāṅgīr for his former favourite dancing girl Anārkalī. The tomb was
surrounded by extensive gardens enclosed within a high protective wall, and several
buildings and palaces were erected in the gardens by Mughal princes and nobles. In
1799, Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh put up his headquarters there while besieging Lahore.
Subsequently, he offered Anārkalī to his eldest son, the heir-apparent Khaṛak Siṅgh.
In 1822, Raṇjīt Siṅgh gave this monument to his French generals, Allard and
Ventura, as their personal residence and headquarters of the Fauj-i-khās. The
generals soon built a new, classical-style residence between Anārkalī's tomb and a
Mughal palace which has since disappeared. This new residence was embellished
with paintings and mirrors inserted in golden frames, descriptions of which have
been left by numerous travellers (Jacquemont, Hugel, Barr, Von Orlich, etc.). The
headquarters of Fauj-i-khās was in a part of this new building. In another wing were
the private apartments of General Allard and Bannou Pān Deī, while General Ventura
established his flourishing harem in the tomb itself.
Outside the garden, towards the east, was the champ de manoeuvre
(operational headquarters) of the Fauj-i-Khās, and further east were the French
Lines, or cantonments, of the troops under Allard and Ventura. It was the most
comfortable and modern building of Lahore during the 1830's and 1840's. South of
the champ de manoeuvre and the French lines was the small bārādarī of Allard and
his wife, profusely decorated by Punjabi artists; that was the "country" seat of the
Allard family. It is in this latter garden that Allard and his wife buried two of their
children, and in the same tomb Allard himself was buried in 1839.
In 1846 Henry Lawrence, the British Resident, moved into the house of Allard
and Ventura in Anārkalī - hence its present name: the Residence. Lord Dalhousie,
the British Governor-General of India, however, refused Ventura's demand to be
paid the price of the building. It occupies today a section of the Punjab Government
Secretariat, and the tomb of Anārkalī has been transformed into the Punjab Records
Office with a small, but interesting museum and Library organized by H. L. O.
Garrett by the 1930's.
J. M. Lafont

ANDREWS, CHARLES FREER (1871-1940), Anglican missionary, scholar and
educationist, was born to John Edwin Andrews on 12 February 1871 in Newcastleon-Tyne in Great Britain. His father was a minister of the Evangelical Anglican
Church. Andrews grew up in an intense and emotional religious environment. A
nearly fatal attack of rheumatic fever in childhood drew him to his mother with an
intense affection and her love created in his mind the first conscious thoughts of God
and Christ, and by the time he entered Cambridge, at the age of 19, he had already
had "a wonderful conversion of my heart to God."
In 1893, Andrews graduated first class in Classics and Theology from
Pembroke College, Cambridge. In 1895 he was confirmed in the Church of England,
and for the next six years he worked in responsible positions in Cambridge. In 1903,
he was accepted by the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts
for missionary work in India with the Cambridge Brotherhood at Delhi. He arrived in
India on 20 March 1904 to teach at St Stephen's College. After teaching at St
Stephen's for 10 years, he moved to Tagore's Santiniketan, then a Nursery of India's
national aspirations. What Andrews saw of the manner of the British government in
India shocked his Christian conscience.
Early during his stay in India, the Rev. C. F. Andrews formed an admiration for
Sikh character and values. According to Daniel C'Connor, The Testimony of C. F.
Andrews, he wrote: "Some of the most cherished days in all my religious
experiences of the East have been spent among the Sikhs, dwelling among them in
their homes, listening to their own religious songs and sharing life with them. I can
say with conviction that these words, daily repeated by their lips, have sunk in their
souls. It would be difficult to find a more generous or forgiving people, and a nation
that bore less malice and hatred in its heart. " There were several occasions when
Andrews showed his solidarity with the Sikh people and interceded on their behalf
when he found that they had been wronged.
After the Jalliāṅvālā Bāgh massacre (1919), Andrews was put under military
arrest by the British to prevent him from going to the Punjab, yet he wrote
extensively condemning the brutal incident. To suppress public reaction against it,
the British administration let loose a reign of terror in the Punjab. All civil rights were
suspended and public flogging and torture of innocent people became the order of
the day. In September 1919 Andrews came to the Punjab to collect evidence to be
placed before the Commission of Enquiry. He felt deeply hurt and chagrined to
witness what the British authority was doing. "Andrews would go to the village
gurdwara and listen to the account of the indignities and inhuman treatment to
which the rural masses were subjected. He would beg for their forgiveness for the
wrong which his fellow countrymen were doing. This overwhelmed the people. They
would cry out and embrace Andrews. " In this manner he went from one gurdwārā
to another on his mission of atonement and healing.
Andrews had been closely following the Sikh struggle for religious autonomy
and justice, which, by this time, had turned into a mass movement. He had been
regularly going to the Golden Temple and other places to attend worship and Sikh
rallies in order to show his solidarity with the Sikh cause. He wrote in The Tribune
his account of what he had seen at the Gurū kā Bāgh morchā. The issue was the
right of the Sikhs to cut firewood from the Bāgh for the requirements of the laṅgar

(community kitchen). A fixed number of Sikh volunteers would daily go to the Bāgh
to cut wood and the police would mercilessly beat them, often unconscious.
Andrews wrote, ". . . There were some hundred present seated on an open
piece of ground watching what was going on in front, their faces strained with
agony. . . There was not a cry raised from the spectators but the lips of very many
of them were moving in prayer. . .
". . . There were four Akālī Sikhs with their black turbans facing a band of
about a dozen policemen, including two English officers. . . Their hands were placed
together in prayer and it was clear they were praying. Then without the slightest
provocation on their part, an Englishman lunged forward the head of his lāṭhī… the
staff struck the Akālī Sikh. . .
"The blow which I saw was sufficient to fell the Akālī Sikh and send him to
ground. He rolled over, and slowly got up once more, and faced the same
punishment over again. . .
"The brutality and inhumanity of the whole scene was indescribably increased
by the fact that the men who were hit were praying to God and had already taken a
vow that they would remain silent and peaceful in word and deed. . .
“There was something far greater in this event than a mere dispute about land
and property. . . A new heroism, learnt through suffering, has risen in the land. A
new lesson in moral warfare has been taught in the world.
"I saw no act, no look of defiance. It was a true martyrdom to them as they
went forward, a true act of faith, a true deed of devotion to God. They remembered
their Gurūs how they had suffered, and they rejoiced to add their own sufferings to
the treasury of their wonderful faith.
". . . Many of them, old soldiers, who had fought in France, said to me
afterwards in the hospital: This was a new kind of battle; we have not fought like
this before. "
In April 1929 Andrews went to Vancouver (Canada). For many years he had
been advocating citizenship rights for Sikhs who had settled in Canada and now he
came in personal contact with them. He was given a rousing welcome by the Sikh
community there and was taken into gurdwārās. Andrews continued his effort to
secure citizenship rights for them.
The Rev. C. F. Andrews died in Calcutta on 5 April 1940.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Chaturvedi, Benarsidas, and Marjorie Sykes, Charles Freer Andrews : A
Narrative. London, 1949
O'Connor, Daniel, The Testamony of C. F. Andrews. Madras, 1974
Bose, Somendranath, ed. , Oppression in the Punjab and C. F. Andrews. 1970
Sykes, Marjorie, ed. , C. F Andrews : Representative Writings. Delhi, 1973
Roy Chaudhry, P. C. , C. F. Andrews : His Life and Times. Bombay, 1971

6.
7.

Mohinder Singh, The Akali Movement. Delhi, 1978
Harbans Singh, The Heritage of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1983
Clarence O. McMullen

AṄGAD DEV, GURŪ, (1504-1552), the second of the ten Gurūs or prophet-teachers
of the Sikh faith was born Lahiṇā on Baisākh vadī 1, Sammat 1561 Bikramī,
corresponding with 31 March 1504. His father, Bhāī Pherū, was a Trehaṇ Khatrī and
a trader of humble means, whose ancestral home was located near the village of
Matte dī Sarāi, now known as Sarāi Nāṅgā, 16 km from Muktsar, in present-day
districṭ of Farīdkoṭ in the Punjab. His mother's name is variously given as Sabhirāī,
Rāmo, Dayā Kaur and Mansā Devī.
In Māgh 1576 Bk/January 1520, he was married to Khīvī, daughter of Devī
Chand, a Marvāh Khatrī from the village of Saṅghar, near Khaḍūr, in Amritsar
district. Two sons, Dāsū and Dātū, and a daughter, Amaro, were born to the couple.
According to some writers, Gurū Aṅgad had two daughters, Amaro and Anokhī.
Lahiṇā became a disciple of Gurū Nānak in his late twenties. There are two
main versions concerning the manner in which he was converted to the teachings of
Gurū Nānak. The janam sākhīs of the Purātan tradition describe Lahiṇā as the pujārī
of Khaḍūr. With only one exception, the inhabitants of Khaḍūr were all worshippers
of the goddess Durgā and Lahiṇā accordingly served as a pujārī of the Devī cult. The
one exception was a Sikh who regularly chanted Gurū Nānak's hymns. On one
occasion, Lahiṇā overheard him singing a śabda and upon asking who had
composed it he was told that it was by Gurū Nānak. Further converse with the Sikh
convinced Lahiṇā of the truth of the Gurū's words and, casting aside the trappings of
Durgā-worship, he too became a Sikh. No initial meeting with Gurū Nānak is
described in this account. The next Purātan anecdote assumes that Lahiṇā is already
in his company at Kartārpur. The other version, to be found in the Ādi Sākhīāṅ (q.
v.), the B40 Janam Sākhī (q. v.) and the Miharbān Janam Sākhī (q. v.), opens with
Lahiṇā living in the village of Harīke, near Matte dī Sarāi. In common with other
inhabitants of the village, Lahiṇā made an annual pilgrimage to a "shrine of Durgā"
which the Mahimā Prakāsh Kavitā later identifies as Jvālāmukhī. On one such
pilgrimage, the party happened to pass by Kartārpur and, hearing that it was the
abode of the renowned Gurū Nānak, they decided to visit the village in order to
receive his darshan. While they were in his presence, Gurū Nānak briefly conversed
with Lahiṇā who was instantly converted. In spite of the protests by the pilgrim
party which he was leading, he announced that the purpose of the pilgrimage had
been fulfilled in Kartārpur and that he would proceed no further. For the remainder
of his master's lifetime, he resided partly in Kartārpur and partly in Khaḍūr .
Gurū Nānak bestowed the name Aṅgad on him to signify that the disciple had
become as much a part of him as his own limbs (aṅg). Aṅgad devoted himself
whole-heartedly to the Gurū's word and to deeds of service. He cleaned the utensils
and swung the fan. The janam sākhīs and the Mahimā Prakāsh lay insistent stress
on the patient, unquestioning loyalty of Aṅgad the disciple, distinguishing him in this
respect not merely from Gurū Nānak's sons but also from other reputable disciples
whose endurance proves to have limits. This quality of Aṅgad's character is
repeatedly affirmed through a series of anecdotes, each seeking to express a
limitless faith and boundless humility. These stories, explicitly or by implication, point
forward to Aṅgad's succession as Gurū. Because he surpasses all others in loyal
obedience, he is the disciple chosen to lead the Panth at the death of its first Master.
Two anecdotes from the janam sākhīswill serve to illustrate this aspect of Gurū
Aṅgad's character. Aṅgad once visited Gurū Nānak out in the fields and was there

commanded to carry a bundle of wet paddy back to the house. Notwithstanding the
fact that he was wearing new clothes, Aṅgad unhesitatingly seized the sodden
bundle and placed it on his head. By the time he reached the house, slime oozing
from the paddy had ruined his clothing. When Gurū Nānak's wife protested at such
apparently thoughtless treatment, he replied that far from being drenched with mud
he had in fact been baptized with saffron. The slime was, in other words, the
insignia of his unquestioning obedience and so of his fitness for the succession. The
second anecdote recounts the incident which is said to have clinched the succession
issue. In order to test the loyalty of his followers, Gurū Nānak once escorted them to
a jungle where he made silver and gold coins appear before them. Many of his Sikhs
immediately disqualified themselves by seizing all they could grasp. Further on most
of those who remained eliminated themselves by picking up jewels which had
similarly appeared on the ground before them. Only two Sikhs now remained, one of
them being Aṅgad. Gurū Nānak led them to a funeral pyre and commanded them
both to eat the corpse which lay on it concealed beneath a shroud. The second Sikh
fled but Aṅgad, obedient to the end, lifted the shroud to do his master's bidding.
Under it he discovered no corpse but Gurū Nānak himself. The test had been
miraculously contrived and Aṅgad alone had passed it. Needless to say the truth of
this anecdote lies not in the series of miracles which it related but in the supreme
loyalty and obedience which it so vividly depicts.
Bypassing his own sons, Gurū Nānak nominated Aṅgad his successor on Hāṛ

vadī 13, 1596 Bk/13 June 1539.

The installation on gurgaddī took place a few days before the death of Gurū
Nānak on Assū vādī 10, 1596 Bk/7 September 1539. Gurū Nānak had made Aṅgad
more than his successor. He had made him equal with himself. He transferred his
own light to him. Aṅgad became Nānak, Nānak II.
Gurū Aṅgad now shifted to Khaḍūr from where he continued his work. Like his
predecessor, he taught people the virtues of piety and dedicated service. The
musician Balvaṇḍ, who composed in praise of the Gurū a portion of the panegyric
popularly known as Ṭikke dī Vār, declares that Gurū Aṅgad was celebrated for his
practice of meditation, austerities and abstinence (japu tapu saṅjamu). Other
anecdotes are on record testifying to these qualities, as also those of humility,
wisdom and generosity. His regular daily programme consisted of the following
activities. During the last watch of the night, he would rise, bathe and then meditate
until daybreak. Then the musicians sang Gurū Nānak's Āsā kī Vār. Gurū Aṅgad was
always present. Afterwards, he attended to sick persons. Such persons, particularly
lepers, came from all parts to be healed by the Gurū. Later he preached and
expounded Gurū Nānak's hymns. At mealtime, all sat together without distinctions of
caste or creed to eat from the community kitchen. The Gurū's wife looked after the
laṅgar. The Gurū and his family ate a simple meal which he earned by twisting muñj,
reed fibre, into string. The afternoon was for children's instruction. Gurū Aṅgad
himself taught them Gurmukhī letters. In the evening there would be more kīrtan
followed by instruction from the Gurū. Khaḍūr became the centre of the Sikh faith as
Kartārpur had been in Gurū Nānak's time. Sikhs came from far and near to seek
instruction and renew their faith. According to Sikh tradition, Emperor Humāyūṅ
came to Khaḍūr and sought Gurū Aṅgad's blessing.

Two varieties of memorials bear visible witness to the life and teachings of
Gurū Aṅgad. The first consists of gurdwārās commemorating particular episodes in
his life and these are almost all clustered in or near Khaḍūr. The main one, now
named Darbār Sāhib, stands within the town at the place occupied by Gurū Aṅgad's
residence and darbār. On the northern outskirts of the town is Mall Akhāṛā, marking
the spot where the Gurū used to give instruction in wrestling. Further out in the
same direction, Tapiāṇā Sāhib designates the place where the Gurū is said to have
performed austerities (tap). This gurdwārā stands besides a tank, opposite the
samādh of Bhāī Bālā. A short distance to the southwest of Khaḍūr, in the village of
Khān Rajādā, stands a gurdwārā commemorating a specific episode in the life of
Gurū Aṅgad. According to tradition, there once arrived in Khaḍūr a yogī who
managed to persuade the local cultivators that current drought would remain
unbroken until they had evicted Gurū Aṅgad. The Gurū agreed to go and, leaving
Khaḍūr, he moved to a theh (site of a ruined village), known at the time as Khān
Rajādā. The drought persisted, however, and did so until (Gurū) Amar Dās
intervened. Following his instructions, the cultivators tied a rope to the yogī's feet
and pulled him round the village. Wherever they dragged him, rain fell in torrents.
The humiliated charlatan was then permitted to depart and Gurū Aṅgad returned to
his rightful place. There is another gurdwārā associated with Gurū Aṅgad in village
Bharovāl, southwest of Khaḍūr, between Khān Rajādā and Khaḍūr Sāhib. In addition
to these five commemorative gurdwārās in the Khaḍūr area there is one in Sarai
Nāṅgā, the village formerly known as Matte dī Sarāi, the birthplace of Gurū Aṅgad.
The second kind of memorial is provided by the small collection of
compositions by Gurū Aṅgad preserved in the Gurū Granth Sāhib. Amongst the Gurū
Granth Sāhib collections of works by the first five Gurūs, this is the smallest,
comprising sixty-three ślokasscattered through vārs which are primarily the work of
the first, third and fourth Gurūs. Fifteen of his ślokashave been incorporated in Vār
Āsā, twelve in Vār Mājh, eleven in Vār Sūhī, nine in Vār Sāraṅg, and the remaining
sixteen in the vārs of Sirī Rāga (2), Soraṭh (1), Rāmkalī (7), Mārū (1) and Malār (5).
Gurū Aṅgad was an inspired poet. The ślokas, in chaste Punjabi, faithfully
reflect the teachings embodied in the works of Gurū Nānak. In them we find the
same stress upon the perils of worldly concerns and self-centred attitudes, and the
same insistence that regular meditation on the divine Name (nām) provides the only
sufficient means of escape. Man is the creature of his self-centred haumai. God,
however, is gracious and proffers in the Divine Name a means of liberation
accessible to all who pursue a life of disciplined meditation and virtuous living. Early
morning is the time for meditation and virtue is the necessary supplement during the
remainder of the day. Two doctrines receive particular emphasis in these ślokas. One
is the total authority of God. This imposes upon all who seek liberation an
inescapable obligation to know and observe the Divine Will (hukam). The second
prominent doctrine concerns the means of recognizing the Divine Will. It is, Gurū
Aṅgad insists, by the grace of Gurū that man may know the way of liberation. Only
those who turn to the Gurū may have both, the hope and the assurance of finding it.
The style in which this message finds expression is simple, direct, and effective.
Pungency is the quality which distinguishes the ślokas of Gurū Aṅgad, an unadorned
vigour which communicates his message in terms easily understood by any member
of his following. Using the same simple style, the Gurū gives pithy expression to
refined doctrine as well as to homely wisdom.

Gurū Aṅgad passed away at Khaḍūr on Chet sudī 4, 1609 Bk/29 March 1552,
passing on succession to Gurū Amar Dās who became Nānak III.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Bhallā, Sarūp Dās, Mahimā Prakāsh. Patiala, 1971
Vīr Siṅgh, Bhāī, ed. , Purātan Janam Sākhī. Amritsar, 1982
Piār Siṅgh, ed. , Ādi Sākhīāṅ. Ludhiana, 1989
Santokh Siṅgh, Bhāī, Srī Gur Pratāp Sūraj Granth. Amritsar, 1926-37
Satibīr Siṅgh, Kudaratī Nūr. Jalandhar, 1981
Macauliffe, Max Arthur, The Sikh Religion. Oxford, 1909
W. H. McLeod

ANGLO-SIKH RELATIONS need to be traced to the transformation of the British East
India Company, a commercial organization, into a political power in India. Victory at
Plassey (23 June 1757) brought Bengal under the de facto control of the British, and
that at Buxar (22 October 1764) made Oudh a British protectorate. By August 1765,
the grant of the dīwānī rights to the Company by the Mughal Emperor Shāh 'Ālam
made them the virtual rulers of Bengal, Bihār and Oṛissā. Robert Clive (1725-74), the
victor of Plassey and governor of Bengal during 1765-67, watched with interest the
repeated invasions of India by Ahmad Shāh Durrānī and rejoiced at his final repulse
at the hands of the Sikhs in 1766-67. Expressing his happiness over Ahmad Shāh's
failure to advance towards the Indian heartland, he wrote to Nawāb Wazīr of Oudh
on 19 February 1767, ". . . extremely glad to know that the Shāh's progress has
been impeded by the Sikhs. . . As long as he does not defeat the Sikhs or come to
terms with them, he cannot penetrate into India. And neither of these events seems
probable since the Sikhs have adopted such effective tactics, and since they hate the
Shāh on account of his destruction of the Chak [Gurū Chakk, i. e. Amritsar]. " At the
same time, in another despatch to Shāh Walī Khān, Ahmad Shāh's prime minister,
Clive offered congratulations on the Shāh's victory over the Sikhs for whom he uses
such epithets as "perfidious" and "tyrannous. "
Since the fall of Sirhind to them in January 1764, the Sikhs had extended their
area of operations to Gaṅgā-Yamunā Doāb and Ruhīlkhaṇḍ bordering on the
territories of the Nawāb of Oudh. Jhaṇḍā Siṅgh Bhaṅgī (d. 1775), a powerful Sikh
sardār, in a letter dated 19 August 1771 addressed to General Robert Barker (172989) sought friendly relations with the British. Warren Hastings (1732-1818),
governor of Bengal since 1772 and made governor-general in 1773, was however
deeply perturbed at the increasing power of the Sikhs. He wanted to know all about
them. At his request Major Antoine Louis Henri Polier (1741-95), a Swiss Engineer in
the company's military service but then employed by Emperor Shāh 'Ālam II,
submitted to him, in 1776, a detailed account of the Sikhs. This paper was never
published, but it was quoted by George Forster (d. 1792), a civil servant of the
company who under Warren Hastings' order journeyed through the Punjab, Kashmīr
and Afghanistan disguised as a Turkish traveller and wrote A Journey from Bengal to
England, published in 1798. Two articles on Sikh history by Polier also appeared in
the Asiatic Annual Register for 1800 and 1802.
Meanwhile, the Sikhs audaciously continued their raids into the Doāb and
Ruhīlkhaṇḍ. The latter territory had been conquered by the Nawāb of Oudh with
British help in 1774, and thus formed part of the British protectorate. In December
1778, the entry of the Sikhs into Ruhīlkhaṇḍ was resisted by British troops who, by
their superior discipline and training as well as by their artillery, were able to force
the Sikhs to retire. In January 1783, Sardār Beghel Siṅgh (d. 1802), at the head of a
large force, approached Anūpshahr on the western bank of the Gaṅgā and was
contemplating to cross the river into Ruhīlkhṇḍ when the force of the Nawāb of
Oudh appeared on the opposite bank. Some British battalions also arrived on the
scene. The Sikhs retreated, changed direction and plundered, during February 1783,
the southern districts of the Doāb up to Shikohābād and Farrukhābād, pillaging Āgrā
on their way back. In the following month they raided the northern parts of Delhi
itself. Warren Hastings directed Major James Browne, the British Agent at the
Mughal court, to organize a confederacy against the Sikhs consisting of the Emperor
Shāh 'Ālam, the Marāṭhās, the Ruhīlās and the Nawāb of Oudh, and also to collect
more information about the Sikhs. Browne's attempt to form a confederacy failed but

he did get in touch with several Sikh sardārs including Baghel Siṅgh's vakīl, Lakhpat
Rāi, and compiled an account under the title History of the Origin and Progress of
the Sicks [sic] for the information of the governor-general. It was later published, in
1788, in the Indian Tracts series.
In response to Browne's overtures leading Sikh sardārs expressed their
willingness to form a friendly alliance with the British, but the latter were too
apprehensive of their power. In January 1784, a body of 30, 000 Sikh horse and foot
crossed the Yamunā. The British government was alarmed and strengthened their
garrisons at Bareilly and Fatehgaṛh. James Browne informed Warren Hastings about
the threatening attitude of the Sikhs, but said that Karam Siṅgh, the leader of the
expedition, had, out of regard for British friendship, persuaded the other Sikh
sardārs not to cross the Gaṅgā into the territories of the Nawāb of Oudh, an ally of
the English. Warren Hastings prepared, in December 1784, his own plan to
checkmate the Sikh influence at Delhi. According to it Jahāṅdār Shāh, the rebel son
of the Emperor Shāh 'Ālam, was to be instigated to organize opposition to the Sikhs
at the imperial court while the Emperor was to receive military help from the British
and the Nawāb of Oudh. This plan, however, also failed partly because Māhādjī
Scindīā, the Marāṭhā chief, would not allow a passage to British troops to reach Delhi
through his trans-Yamunā territory. On 30 March 1785, Ambājī Iṅgle, one of
Scindīā's generals, made a provisional treaty of peace and friendship with the Sikhs.
But during April 1785, Sikhs' emissaries waited upon British commanders at
Farrukhābād and Lucknow offering to form an alliance with them against the
Marāṭhās. Nothing came out of either set of parleys.
Warren Hastings left India on 1 February 1785. John Macpherson, the acting
governor-general, deputed on 19 June 1786 George Forster, who had already
travelled through the Sikh territories, to establish contacts with the Sikhs and collect
intelligence about their future designs. The new governor-general, Lord Cornwallis
(September 1786 to October 1793), favoured a policy of caution and persuasion in
dealing with the Sikhs and instructed the British Resident at Lucknow to please the
Sikh vakīl or agent posted there. At the same time he cautioned the Nawāb of Oudh
to ensure stricter vigilance at Anūpshahr and Dārānagar ferries and assured him of
British reinforcements as and when needed.
In December 1790, a Sikh band of 300 men attacked Longcroft, an Englishman
in indigo business, at village Jalaulī in 'Alīgaṛh district, but retired as their leader was
killed by the villagers. Soon after, Bhaṅgā Siṅgh of Thānesar assuming the
leadership advanced on Anūpshahr where he collected rākhī and captured, on 3
January 1791, the local British commander, Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Stuart, whom
he brought to Thānesar and demanded 2, 00, 000 rupees as ransom for his release.
Many Englishmen offered to collect this amount but Lord Cornwallis did not agree.
Ultimately a sum of Rs 60, 000 was paid through Begam Samrū and the Colonel was
set free on 24 October 1791.
With their conquest of Delhi on 11 September 1803, the British had established
their supremacy in the region. Meanwhile, Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh had emerged as
the ruler of the Sikhs, overpowering the misl chiefs. The Sikh raids into the Doāb
and the region north of Delhi came to an end. The cis-Sutlej Sikh chiefs accepted the
suzerainty of the British who now entered into direct relationship with the Sikh
monarch, Raṇjīt Siṅgh.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Hasrat, B J. , Anglo-Sikh Relations. Hoshiarpur, 1968
Bal, S. S. , British Policy Towards the Panjab 1844-49. Calcutta, 1971
Sarkar, Jadunath, Fall of the Mughal Empire. Calcutta, 1932
Harbans Singh, The Heritage of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1983
Harī Rām Gupta

ANGLO-SIKH TREATIES (LAHORE, 9 and 11 March 1846), After the end of the first
Anglo-Sikh war, the British governor-general, Lord Hardinge, entered the Sikh capital
on 20 February 1846, and on 9 March imposed upon the young Mahārājā Duleep
Siṅgh, then aged seven and a half years, a treaty of peace. The preamble to the
treaty accused the Lahore government and the Sikh army of having violated the
terms of the treaty of 1809 by unprovoked aggression on British provinces. The
territories of Mahārājā Duleep Singh situated on the left bank of the Sutlej, were
confiscated and annexed. According to the terms of the treaty, the Mahārājā
renounced for himself and his heirs all claims in connection with these territories. He
ceded to the East India Company in perpetual sovereignty, "all his forts, territories
and rights" in the Jalandhar Doāb - the territory both hilly and plain lying between
the Sutlej and the Beās - and agreed to the payment of one and a half crores of
rupees as indemnity for the expenses of the war. As the Lahore government was
unable to pay this amount, additional hilly territory situated between the Beās - and
the Indus, including the provinces of Kashmīr and Hazārā, was taken over by the
British. The Sikh army which the British dubbed in the treaty as "mutinous troops of
the Lahore Army, " was disbanded, and the strength of the new one to be organized
was restricted to 25 battalions of infantry (20, 000 men), and 12, 000 cavalry. Under
certain specific conditions, British troops were to have free passage through Lahore
territories. All guns used in the war were to be surrendered to the British. Mahārājā
Duleep Siṅgh also agreed never to take or retain in his service any British subject
nor any European or American national without the consent of the British. The
Lahore government were to recognize the independent sovereignty of Rājā Gulāb
Siṅgh in his possessions, and in those which would be made over to him by the
British government.
Additional articles supplementary to the treaty, added two days later (11 March
1846), provided (a) that at the solicitation of the Darbār, a British force would
remain in occupation of Lahore, in the fort as well as in the city, till the end of the
year 1846, to protect the Mahārājā during the reorganization of the army, (b) that
the British government shall respect the bona fide rights of jāgīrdārs in the Lahore
territories, and (c) that the British government shall be at liberty to retain any part of
the State property in the forts in the ceded territories, paying adequate
compensation.
Texts of the treaties :
Treaty between the British Government and the State of Lahore - 1846
Whereas the treaty of amity and concord, which was concluded between the
British Government and the late Maharajah Runjeet Sing, the Ruler of Lahore, in
1809, was broken by the unprovoked aggression, on the British Provinces, of the
Sikh Army, in December last; and whereas, on that occasion, by the Proclamation,
dated 13th December, the territories then in the occupation of the Maharajah of
Lahore, on the left or British bank of the River Sutlej, were confiscated and annexed
to the British Provinces; and since that time hostile operations have been prosecuted
by the two Governments; the one against the other, which have resulted in the
occupation of Lahore by the British troops; and whereas it has been determined
that, upon certain conditions, peace shall be re-established between the two
Governments, the following treaty of peace between the Honorable English East
India Company and Maharajah Dhuleep Sing Bahadoor, and his children, heirs and

successors, has been concluded on the part of the Honorable Company by Frederick
Currie, Esquire, and Brevet-Major Henry Montgomery Lawrence, by virtue of full
powers to that effect vested in them by the Right Hon'ble Sir Henry Hardinge, G. C.
B. , one of her Britannic Majesty's Most Hon'ble Privy Council, Governor-General,
appointed by the Hon'ble Company to direct and control all their affairs in the East
Indies, and on the part of His Highness Maharajah Dhuleep Sing by Bhaee Ram Sing,
Rajah Lal Sing, Sirdar Tej Sing, Sirdar Chuttur Sing Attareewalla, Sirdar Runjore Sing
Majeethia, Dewan Deena Nath and Fakeer Nooroodden, vested with full powers and
authority on the part of His Highness.
Article 1. There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between the British
Government on the one part, and Maharajah Dhuleep Sing, his heirs and successors
on the other.
Article 2. The Maharajah of Lahore renounces for himself, his heirs and
successors, all claim to, or connection with the territories lying to the south of the
River Sutlej, and engages never to have any concern with those territories or the
inhabitants thereof.
Article 3. The Maharajah cedes to the Hon'ble Company, in prepetual
sovereignty, all his forts, territories and rights in the Doab or country, hill and plain,
situated between the Rivers Beas and Sutlej.
Article 4. The British Government having demanded from the Lahore State, as
indemnification for the expenses of the war, in addition to the cession of territory
described in Article 3, payment of one and half crore of Rupees, and the Lahore
Government being unable to pay the whole of this sum at this time, or to give
security satisfactory to the British Government for its eventual payment, the
Maharajah cedes to the Honorable Company, in prepetual sovereignty, as equivalent
for one crore of Rupees, all his forts, territories, rights and interests in the hill
countries, which are situated between the Rivers Beas and Indus, including the
Provinces of Cashmere and Hazarah.
Article 5. The Maharajah will pay to the British Government the sum of 60
lakhs of Rupees on or before the ratification of this Treaty.
Article 6. The Maharajah engages to disband the mutinous troops of the
Lahore Army, taking from them their arms---and His Highness agrees to reorganize
the Regular or Aeen Regiments of Infantry, upon the system, and according to the
Regulations as to pay and allowances, observed in the time of the late Maharajah
Runjeet Sing. The Maharajah further engages to pay up all arrears to the soldiers
that are discharged, under the provisions of this Article.
Article 7. The Regular Army of the Lahore State shall henceforth be limited to
25 Battalions of Infantry, consisting of 800 bayonets each with twelve thousand
Cavalry-this number at no time to be exceeded without the concurrence of the
British Government. Should it be necessary at any time - for any special cause - that
this force should be increased, the cause shall be fully explained to the British
Government, and when the special necessity shall have passed, the regular troops
shall be again reduced to the standard specified in the former Clause of this
Article.

Article 8. The Maharajah will surrender to the British Government all the guns thirty six in number- which have been pointed against the British troops and which,
having been placed on the right Bank of the River Sutlej, were not captured at the
battle of Subraon.
Article 9. The control of the Rivers Beas and Sutlej, with the continuations of
the latter river, commonly called the Gharrah and the Punjnud, to the confluence of
the Indus at Mithunkote - and the control of the Indus from Mithunkote to the
borders of Beloochistan, shall, in respect to tolls and ferries, rest with the British
Government. The provisions of this Article shall not interfere with the passage of
boats belonging to the Lahore Government on the said rivers, for the purpose of
traffic or the conveyance of passengers up and down their course. Regarding the
ferries between the two countries respectively, at the several ghats of the said
rivers, it is agreed that the British Government, after defraying all the expenses of
management and establishments, shall account to the Lahore Government for onehalf the net profits of the ferry collections. The provisions of this Article have no
reference to the ferries on that part of the River Sutlej which forms the boundary of
Bhawulpore and Lahore respectively.
Article 10. If the British Government should, at any time, desire to pass troops
through the territories of His Highness the Maharajah, for the protection of the
British territories, or those of their Allies, the British troops shall, on such special
occasion, due notice being given, be allowed to pass through the Lahore territories.
In such case the officers of the Lahore State will afford facilities in providing supplies
and boats for the passage of rivers, and the British Government will pay the full price
of all such provisions and boats, and will make fair compensation for all private
property that may be damaged. The British Government will, moreover, observe all
due consideration to the religious feelings of the inhabitants of those tracts through
which the army may pass.
Article 11. The Maharajah engages never to take or to retain in his service any
British subject---nor the subject of any European or American State - without the
consent of the British Government.
Article 12. In consideration of the services rendered by Rajah Golab Sing of
Jummoo, to the Lahore State, towards procuring the restoration of the relations of
amity between the Lahore and British Governments, the Maharajah hereby agrees to
recognize the Independent sovereignty of Rajah Golab Sing in such territories and
districts in the hills as may be made over to the said Rajah Golab Sing, by separate
Agreement between himself and the British Government, with the dependencies
thereof, which may have been in the Rajah's possession since the time of the late
Maharajah Khurruck Sing, and the British Government, in consideration of the good
conduct of Raja Golab Sing, also agrees to recognize his independence in such
territories, and to admit him to the privileges of a separate Treaty with the British
Government.
Article 13. In the event of any dispute or difference arising between the Lahore
State and Rajah Golab Sing, the same shall be referred to the arbitration of the
British Government, and by its decision the Maharajah engages to abide.

Article 14. The limits of the Lahore territories shall not be, at any time,
changed without the concurrence of the British Government.
Article 15. The British Government will not exercise any interference in the
internal administration of the Lahore State - but in all cases or questions which may
be referred to the British Government, the Governor-General will give the aid of his
advice and good offices for the furtherance of the interests of the Lahore
Government.
Article 16. The subjects of either State shall, on visiting the territories of the
other, be on the footing of the subjects of the most favoured nation.
This Treaty consisting of sixteen articles, has been this day settled by Frederick
Currie, Esquire, and Brevet-Major Henry Montgomery Lawrence acting under the
directions of the Right Hon'ble Sir Henry Hardinge, G. C. B. , Governor-General, on
the part of the British Government, and by Bhaee Ram Sing, Rajah Lal Sing, Sirdar
Tej Sing, Sirdar Chuttur Sing Attareewalla, Sirdar Runjore Sing Majeethia, Dewan
Deena Nath, and Faqueer Noorooddeen, on the part of the Maharajah Dhuleep Sing,
and the said Treaty has been this day ratified by the seal of the Right Hon'ble Sir
Henry Hardinge, G. C. B. , Governor-General, and by that of His Highness Maharajah
Dhuleep Sing.

Done at Lahore, this ninth day of March, in year of Our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and forty-six, corresponding with the tenth day of Rubbee-ool-awul,
1262 Hijree, and ratified on the same date.

(Sd.) H. Hardinge (L. S.)
(Sd.) Maharajah Dhuleep Sing (L. S.)
. . Bhaee Ram Sing (L. S.)
. . Rajah Lal Sing (L. S.)
. . Sirdar Tej Sing (L. S.)
. . Sirdar Chuttur Sing Attareewalla (L. S.)
. . Sirdar Runjore Sing Majeethia (L. S.)
. . Dewan Deena Nath (L. S.)
. . Faqueer Noorooddeen (L. S.)
ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT concluded between the BRITISH GOVERNMENT
and the LAHORE DURBĀR on 11 March 1846
Whereas the Lahore Government has solicited the Governor-General to leave a
British Force at Lahore, for the protection of the Maharajah's person and of the

Capital, till the reorganization of the Lahore army, according to the provisions of
Article 6 of the Treaty of Lahore, dated the 9th instant; and whereas the GovernorGeneral has, on certain conditions, consented to the measure; and whereas it is
expedient that certain matters concerning the territories ceded by Articles 3 and 4 of
the aforesaid Treaty should be specifically determined, the following eight Articles of
Agreement have this day been concluded between the aforementioned contracting
parties.
Article 1. The British Government shall leave at Lahore, till the close of the
current year, AD 1846, such force as shall seem to the Governor-General adequate
for the purpose of protecting the person of the Maharajah and the inhabitants of the
City of Lahore, during the reorganization of the Sikh Army, in accordance with the
provisions of Article 6 of the Treaty of Lahore. That force to be withdrawn at any
convenient time before the expiration of the year, if the object to be fulfilled shall, in
the opinion of the Durbar, have been attained but the force shall not be detained at
Lahore beyond the expiration of the current year.
Article 2. The Lahore Government agrees that the force left at Lahore for the
purpose specified in the foregoing Article shall be placed in full possession of the
Fort and the City of Lahore, and that the Lahore troops shall be removed from within
the City. The Lahore Government engages to furnish convenient quarters for the
officers and men of the said force, and to pay to the British Government all the extra
expenses in regard to the said force, which may be incurred by the British
Government, in consequence of the troops being employed away from their own
Cantonments and in a Foreign Territory.
Article 3. The Lahore Government engages to apply itself immediately and
earnestly to the reorganization of its army according to the prescribed conditions,
and to communicate fully with the British authorities left at Lahore, as to the
progress of such reorganization, and as to the location of the troops.
Article 4. If the Lahore Government fails in the performance of the conditions
of the foregoing Article, the British Government shall be at liberty to withdraw the
force from Lahore at any time before the expiration of the period specified in Article
1.
Article 5. The British Government agrees to respect the bona fide rights of
those jaghiredars, within the territories ceded by Articles 3 and 4 of the Treaty of
Lahore, dated 9th instant, who were attached to the families of the late Maharajahs
Runjeet Sing, Kurruk Sing and Shere Sing; and the British Government will maintain
those jaghiredars in their bona fide possessions during their lives.
Article 6. The Lahore Government shall receive the assistance of the British
Local Authorities in recovering the arrears of revenue justly due to the Lahore
Government from the kardars and managers in the territories ceded by the
provisions of Articles 3 and 4 of the Treaty of Lahore, to the close of the khureef
harvest of the current year, viz. 1902 of the Sumbut Bikramajeet.
Article 7. The Lahore Government shall be at liberty to remove from the forts,
in the territories specified in the foregoing Article, all treasure and State property,
with the exception of guns. Should, however, the British Government desire to retain

any part of the said property, they shall be at liberty to do so, paying for the same
at a fair valuation, and the British officers shall give their assistance to the Lahore
Government in disposing on the spot of such part of the aforesaid property as the
Lahore Government may not wish to remove, and the British Officers may not desire
to retain.
Article 8. Commissioners shall be immediately appointed by the two
Governments to settle and lay down the boundary between the two States, as
defined by Article 4 of the Treaty of Lahore, dated March 9th, 1846.

(Sd.) H. HARDINGE (L. S.)
Sd.) Maharajah Dhuleep Sing (L. S.)
. . Bhaee Ram Sing (L. S.)
. . Rajah Lal Sing (L. S.)
. . Sirdar Tej Sing (L. S.)
. . Sirdar Chuttur Sing Attareewalla (L. S.)
. . Sirdar Runjore Sing Majeethia (L. S.)
. . Dewan Deena Nath (L. S.)
. . Faqueer Noorooddeen (L. S.)

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Sūrī, Sohan Lāl, 'Umdāt-ut-Twārīkh. Lahore, 1885-89
Cunningham, Joseph Davey, A History of the Sikhs. London, 1849
Ganda Singh, The British Occupation of the Panjab. Amritsar, 1955
Hasrat, B. J. , Anglo-Sikh Relations. Hoshiarpur, 1968
Harbans Singh, The Heritage of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1983
B. J. Hasrat

ANGLO-SIKH TREATY (1806) followed Jasvant Rāo Holkar's crossing over into the
Punjab in 1805 after he was defeated at Fatehgaṛh and Ḍīg in December 1804 by
the British. Accompanied by his Ruhīlā ally, AmīrKhān, and a Marāṭhā force
estimated at 15, 000, Holkar arrived at Paṭiālā, but on hearing the news that the
British general, Lake, was in hot pursuit, both the refugees fled northwards, entered
the Jalandhar Doāb, and ultimately reached Amritsar. Raṇjīt Siṅgh, then camping
near Multān, hastened to Amritsar to meet Holkar. He was hospitable and
sympathetic towards the Marāṭhā chief, but was shrewd enough not to espouse a
forlorn cause and come into conflict with the British, especially when he was far from
securely established on the throne. Through diplomatic negotiation, he brought
about reconciliation between Holkar and the British commander-in-chief. A treaty of
friendship and amity was entered into by (Sardār) Raṇjīt Siṅgh along with Sardār
Fateh Siṅgh Āhlūvālīā of Kapūrthalā with the East India Company on 1 January 1806
whereby it was agreed that, as long as these Sikh chiefs had no friendly connections
with enemies of the British or committed no act of hostility, the British armies would
never enter into the territories of the said chieftains, nor would the British
government form any plan for the seizure or sequestration of their possessions or
property.
The Anglo-Sikh treaty of 1806 brought the Sikh chief into direct contact with
the British government. Raṇjīt Siṅgh's reluctance to precipitate a clash with the
British saved the infant State of Lahore from being overrun by Lake's armies. The
Mahārājā not only kept the Punjab from becoming a theatre of war between two
foreign armies, but also saved the Marāṭhā chief from utter ruin and had his
territories beyond Delhi restored to him.
The text of the treaty:
Treaty of Friendship and Amity between the Honorable East India Company
and the Sirdars Runjeet Sing and Futteh Sing 1806. .
Sirdar Runjeet Sing and Sirdar Futteh Sing have consented to the following
Articles of Agreement concluded by Lieutenant Colonel John Malcolm, under the
special authority of the Right Honorable Lord Lake, himself duly authorized by the
Honorable Sir George Hilaro Barlow, Baronet, Governor General, and Sirdar Futteh
Sing, as principal on the part of himself and plenipotentiary on the part of Runjeet
Sing.
Article 1. Sirdar Runjeet Sing and Sirdar Futteh Sing Aloowalia hereby agree
that they will cause Jeswunt Rao Holkar to remove with his army to the distance of
30 coss from Amritsar immediately, and will never hereafter hold any further
connection with him, or aid or assist him with troops, or in any other manner
whatever, and they further agree that they will not in any way molest such of
Jeswunt Rao Holkar's followers or troops as are desirous of returning to their homes
in the Deccan, but, on the contrary, will render them every assistance in their power
for carrying such intention into execution.
Article 2. The British Government hereby agrees that in case a pacification
should not be effected between that Government and Jeswunt Rao Holkar, the
British Army shall move from its present encampment on the banks of the River Beas
as soon as Jeswunt Rao Holkar aforesaid shall have marched with his army to the

distance of 30 coss from Amritsar; and that in any Treaty which may hereafter be
concluded between the British Government and Jeswunt Rao Holkar, it shall be
stipulated that, immediately after the conclusion of the said Treaty, Holkar shall
evacuate the territories of the Sikhs and march towards his own, and that he shall in
no way whatever injure or destroy such parts of the Sikh country as may lie in his
route. The British Government further agrees that as long as the said Chieftains
Runjeet Sing and Futteh Sing abstain from holding any friendly connection with the
enemies of that Government, or from committing any act of hostility on their own
parts against the said Government, the British Armies shall never enter the territories
of the said Chieftains, nor will the British Government form any plans for the seizure
or sequestration of their possessions or property.
Dated 1st January, 1806, corresponding with 10th Shawal, 1220 H. E.
Seal of Runjeet Sing Seal of Futteh Sing
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Sūrī Sohan Lāl, 'Umdāt-ut-Twārīkh. Lahore, 1885-89
Hasrat, B. J, Anglo-Sikh Relations. Hoshiarpur, 1968
B. J. Hasrat

ANGLO-SIKH TREATY (1840), In 1832, a treaty was executed by Lord William
Bentinck, the Governor-General of India, through Col. C. M. Wade, with the Lahore
Darbār concerning navigation through the Sutlej and the Indus rivers within the
Khālsā territory. Another treaty on the subject was subsequently executed in 1834,
fixing a duty on every mercantile boat, independent of its freight and of the nature
of its merchandise. A third treaty was executed on this subject on the arrival of
George Russell Clerk, agent to the Governor-General, at the Sikh Darbār, in May
1839, adjusting the rate of duties on merchandise, according to quantity and kind.
The treaty between the Sikh and British governments, signed in the time of
Mahārājā Khaṛak Siṅgh on 27 June 1840, provided for duties, on a fixed scale,
proportionate to the measurements of boats, and not on the variety of commodities.
The treaty provides a schedule of rates of duties on the mercantile boats, viz. on
boats not exceeding 250 maunds of freight, 50 rupees; on boats exceeding 250
maunds but not exceeding 500 maunds, 100 rupees; and on all boats above 500
maunds, 150 rupees. Grain, wood and limestone were declared to be free of duty
while duty was payable on every other commodity according to the measurement of
the boat.
The text of the treaty:
Treaty with Maha Rajah Khurruk Singh-1840
(Signed by Maha Rajah Khurruk Singh)
Seal of
Maha Rajah Khurruk Singh

Formerly a Treaty was executed by the Right Honorable Lord William Cavendish
Bentinck, the Governor-General of India, on the 14th of Poos, Sumbut 1889
(corresponding with AD 1832), through Colonel (then Captain) Wade, concerning the
navigation of the Sutlej and the Scinde rivers in the Khalsa territory, in concurrence
with the wishes of both the friendly and allied Governments. Another Treaty on the
subject was subsequently executed through the same officer, in Sumbut 1891
(corresponding with AD 1834), fixing a duty on every mercantile boat, independent
of the quantity of its freight, and the nature of its merchandize. A third Treaty was
executed on this subject, in accordance with the wishes of both Governments, on
the arrival of Mr. Clerk, Agent to the Governor-General, at the Durbar, in May 1839,
adjusting the rate of duties on merchandize, according to quantity and kind, and
although at the end of that document so much was specified as that the two high
powers should after this never propose a rate below (less than) that specified, yet,
not withstanding after this, when that gentleman came to the Khalsa Durbar at
Amritsur, in Jeth, Sumbut 1897 (corresponding with May 1840), he explained the
difficulties and inconvenience which seemed to result to trade under the system
proposed last year, in consequence of the obstruction to boats for the purpose of
search and the ignorance of traders, and the difficulty of adjusting duties according
to the different kinds of articles freighted in the boats, and proposed to revise that
system by fixing a scale of duties proportionate to the measurement of boats, and
not on the kind of commodities, if this arrangement should be approved of by both

Governments. Having reported to his Government the circumstances of the case, he
now drew up a Schedule of the rate of duties on the mercantile boats navigating the
Rivers Scinde and Sutlej and forwarded it for the consideration of this friendly
Durbar. The Khalsa Government, therefore, with due regard to the established or
back alliance, having added a few sentences in accordance with the late Treaties,
and agreeably to what is already well understood, has signed and sealed the
Schedule, and it shall never be at all liable to any contradiction, difference, change
or alteration, without the concurrence and concert of both Governments, in
consideration of mutual advantages, upon condition it does not interfere with the
established custom duties at Amritsur, Lahore, and other inland places, or the other
rivers in the Khalsa territory.

Article l. Grain, wood and limestone will be free from duty.
Article 2. With exception to the above, every commodity to pay duty according
to the measurement of the boat.
Article 3. Duty on a boat not exceeding two hundred and fifty maunds of
freight, proceeding from the foot of the hills, Roopur or Loodiana, to Mithenkote or
Rojan, or from Rojan or Mithenkote to the foot of the hills, Roopur or Loodiana will
be Rs. 50
viz. ,
From the foot of the hills to Ferozepore, or back

Rs.
20

From Ferozepore to Bhawulpore, or back

Rs.
15

From Bhawulpore to Mithenkote or Rojan, or back

Rs.
15

The whole trip, or down

Rs.
50

Duty on a boat above two hundred and fifty maunds, but not exceeding five
hundred maunds, from the foot of the hills, Roopur or Loodiana, to Mithenkote or
Rojan, or from Rojan or Mithenkote to the foot of the hills, Roopur or Loodiana will
be Rs. 100.
viz. ,
From the foot of the hills to Ferozepore, or back

Rs. 40

From Ferozepore to Bhawulpore, or back

Rs. 30

From Bhawulpore to Mithenkote or Rojan, or back

Rs. 30

The whole trip, up or down

Rs. 100

Duty on all boats above five hundred maunds will be

Rs. 150

viz. ,
From the foot of the hills to Ferozepore, or back

Rs. 60

From Ferozepore to Bhawulpore, or back

Rs. 45

From Bhawulpore to Mithenkote or Rojan or back

Rs. 45

The whole trip, up or down

Rs. 150

Article 4. Boats to be classed 1, 2, or 3, and the same to be written on the
boat, and every boat to be registered.
Article 5. These duties on merchandize frequenting the Sutlej and Scinde are
not to interfere with the duties on the banks of other rivers, or with the established
inland custom houses, throughout the Khalsa Territory, which will remain on their
usual footing.

Dated 13th Assar, Sumbut 1897, corresponding with 27June 1840
(True translation)
(Sd.) G. CLERK,

Agent to the Governor-General
Approved by the Governor-General, 10th August 1840

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Cunningham, Joseph Davey, A History of the Sikhs. London, 1849
Hasrat, B. J. , Anglo-Sikh Relations. Hoshiarpur, 1968
Sūrī, Sohan Lāl, 'Umdāt-ut-Twārīkh. Lahore, 1885-89
B. J. Hasrat

ANGLO-SIKH TREATY (AMRITSAR, 1809). Napoleon's victories in Europe had
alarmed the British, who, fearing a French attack on the country through
Afghanistan, decided to win the Sikhs over to their side and sent a young officer,
Charles Theophilus Metcalfe, to Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh's court with an offer of
friendship. Metcalfe met the Mahārājā in his camp at Khem Karan, near Kasūr, on 12
September 1808, taking with him a large number of presents sent by the GovernorGeneral of India. He told him how the English wished to have friendly relations with
him and presented to him the draft of a treaty.
Raṇjīt Siṅgh did not credit the theory that the British had made the proposal to
him because of the danger from Napoleon. On the other hand, he showed his
willingness to co-operate with the British, provided the latter recognized his claim of
para-mountcy over all the Mājhā and Mālvā Sikhs. He suspected that the real object
of the British was to put a seal on his southern boundary and draw a permanent line
between his dominions and their own. He rejected Metcalfe's terms and made his
own, seeking the British to recognize his authority over the Sikh country to the south
of the Sutlej.
Metcalfe expressed his inability to make any changes in the draft of the treaty
he had brought, but offered to forward Raṇjīt Siṅgh's proposal to the GovernorGeneral. Raṇjīt Siṅgh suddenly struck camp and crossed the Sutlej. Metcalfe
followed him from place to place, without being able to secure another interview
with him for any serious discussions. Raṇjīt Siṅgh overran the territory on the left
bank of the river, thus shrewdly imposing on his English guest the role of a witness
to his cis-Sutlej acquisitions.
Raṇjīt Siṅgh's bold and skilful policy would have borne fruit, had not the
situation in Europe changed. As the danger of Napoleon's attack lessened, the British
became arrogant in their attitude. On his return to Lahore, Raṇjīt Siṅgh received a
message from the Governor-General that the British had taken the Sikh chiefs south
of the Sutlej under their protection. The British sent a force under the command of
Colonel David Ochterlony who, passing through Būṛīā and Paṭiālā, came very close to
the Sutlej and stationed himself at Ludhiāṇā. Raṇjīt Siṅgh also started making
warlike preparations. Dīwān Mohkam Chand was asked to proceed with the troops
and artillery from Kāṅgṛā to Phillaur, on the Sutlej. The guns were mounted on the
Fort of Gobindgaṛh in Amritsar and powder and supplies laid in. The chiefs and
nobles were asked to keep their soldiers in readiness. A large body of troops
gathered in Lahore in a few days' time.
Meanwhile, Metcalfe, who had followed Raṇjīt Siṅgh to Lahore, presented a
new treaty which was based on terms first offered by the British and the proposal
made by Raṇjīt Siṅgh. The treaty in this form was acceptable to the Sikh ruler.
Although it stopped him from extending his influence beyond the Sutlej, he was left
master of the territories, south of the river, which were in his possession before
Metcalfe's visit. The treaty was signed at Amritsar on 25 April 1809. It provided that
the British government would count the Lahore Darbār among the most honourable
powers and would in no way interfere with the Sikh ruler's dominions to the north of
the Sutlej. Both governments pledged friendship to each other. Raṇjīt Siṅgh
appointed Bakhshī Nand Siṅgh Bhaṇḍārī to stay at Ludhiāṇā as his agent with the
English. The English sent Khushwaqt Rāi to Lahore as their representative at the
Sikh court.

Although the treaty of 1809 halted Raṇjīt Siṅgh's ambitions at the Sutlej and
prevented the unification of the Mājhā and Mālvā Sikhs into a new commonwealth of
the Khālsā, it gave the Sikh sovereign one clear advantage. Security on the southern
frontier allowed him freely to consolidate his power in the Punjab, evolve a
centralized system of government, build up a powerful army, and pursue
unhampered his conquests in the north, northwest and southwest.
The text of the treaty:
Treaty with the Rajah of Lahore-1809
Whereas certain differences which had arisen between the British Government
and the Rajah of Lahore have been happily and amicably adjusted, and both parties
being anxious to maintain the relations of perfect amity and concord, the following
Articles of treaty, which shall be binding on the heirs and successors of the two
parties, have been concluded by Rajah Runjeet Sing on his own part, and by the
agency of Charles Theophilus Metcalfe, Esquire, on the part of the British
Government.
Article 1. Perpetual friendship shall subsist between the British Government
and the State of Lahore. The latter shall be considered, with respect to the former,
to be on the footing of the most favoured powers; and the British Government will
have no concern with the territories and subjects of the Rajah to the northward of
the Sutlej.
Article 2. The Rajah will never maintain in the territory occupied by him and
his dependants, on the left bank of the River Sutlej, more troops than are necessary
for the internal duties of that territory, nor commit or suffer any encroachments on
the possessions or rights of the Chiefs in its vicinity.
Article 3. In the event of a violation of any of the preceding Articles, or of a
departure from the rules of friendship on the part of either State, this Treaty shall be
considered to be null and void.
Article 4. This Treaty, consisting of four Articles, having been settled and
concluded at Amritsar, on the 25th day of April, 1809, Mr. Charles Theophilus
Metcalfe has delivered to the Rajah of Lahore a copy of the same, in English and
Persian, under his seal and signature, and the said Rajah has delivered another copy
of the same, under his seal and signature; and Mr. Charles Theophilus Metcalfe
engages to procure, within the space of two months, a copy of the same duly
ratified by the Right Honourable the Governor- General in Council, on the receipt of
which by the Rajah, the present Treaty shall be deemed complete and binding on
both parties, and the copy of it now delivered to the Rajah shall be returned.
Seal and signature of
C. T. METCALFE

Signature and seal of

Company's Seal

RAJAH RUNJEET SING

MINTO (Sd)

Ratified by the Governor-General in Council on 30th May, 1809.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

Sūrī, Sohan Lāl, 'Umdāt-ut-Twārīkh. Lahore, 1885-89
Harbans Siṅgh, Maharaja Ranjit Singh. Delhi, 1980
Cunningham, Joseph Davey, A History of the Sikhs. London, 1849
Hasrat, B J. , Anglo-Sikh Relations. Hoshiarpur, 1968
B. J. Hasrat

ANGLO-SIKH TREATY (BHYROWĀL / BHAROVĀL, December 1846), signed on 16
December 1846 between the East India Company and the minor Mahārājā Duleep
Siṅgh, provided for a British-controlled regency till the Mahārājā came of age.
Mahārāṇī Jind Kaur, who was acting as regent of her son, Duleep Siṅgh, had
believed that, as stipulated in the treaty of Lahore (11 March 1846), the British force
would leave Lahore. But she was soon disillusioned as the British, instead of quitting,
started strengthening their authority over Lahore administration. Governor-General
Henry Hardinge sent to Lahore his secretary, Frederick Currie, who isolating
Mahārāṇī Jind Kaur, manipulated the leading sardārs and chiefs into requesting the
British for a fresh treaty. This led to the signing of the Treaty of Bhyrowāl. By this
agreement every article of the treaty of 9 March 1846 was reaffirmed except article
15, which precluded British interference in the internal administration of the State of
Lahore. The regent (Mahārāṇī Jind Kaur) was pensioned off; a British resident was
to direct and control the administration of the State of Lahore with a new council of
regency of eight members. A British force was to remain at Lahore for the protection
of the Mahārājā and the cost for its maintenance (22 lakh rupees) was to be borne
by the State of Lahore. The Governor-General could also disband and recruit Sikh
armies and occupy any fort in the Punjab. The council of ministers was to hold office
during the pleasure of the British resident. The treaty of Bhyrowāl, effective during
the minority of Mahārājā Duleep Siṅgh, was to terminate on 4 September 1854
when the Mahārājā would attain the age of sixteen.
The treaty of Bhyrowāl transformed the Sikh kingdom into a virtual British
protectorate. The Darbār became a willing instrument subservient to the authority of
the British resident, who was to superintend the internal and external affairs of the
State in accordance with the instructions of the Government of India. This is how the
new arrangement was described by John Marshman: "An officer of the company's
artillery became, in effect, the successor of Ranjit Siṅgh. "
The text of the treaty :
ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT concluded between the BRITISH GOVERNMENT
and the LAHORE DURBAR on 16 December 1846
Whereas the Lahore Durbar and the principal Chiefs and Sirdars of the State
have in express terms communicated to the British Government their anxious desire
that the Governor-General should give his aid and assistance to maintain the
administration of the Lahore State during the minority of Maharajah Dulleep Sing,
and have declared this measure to be indispensable for the maintenance of the
Government; and whereas the Governor-General has, under certain conditions,
consented to give the aid and assistance solicited, the following Articles of
Agreement, in modification of the Articles of Agreement executed at Lahore on the
11th March last, have been concluded on the part of the British Government by
Frederick Currie, Esquire, Secretary to Government of India, and Lieutenant-Colonel
Henry Montgomery Lawrence, C. B. , Agent to the Governor-General, North-West
Frontier, by virtue of full powers to that effect vested in them by the Right
Honorable Viscount Hardinge, G. C. B. , Governor-General, and on the part of His
Highness Maharajah Dulleep Sing, by Sirdar Tej Sing, Sirdar Shere Sing, Dewan
Deena Nath, Fukeer Noorooddeen, Rai Kishen Chund, Sirdar Runjore Sing Majethea,
Sirdar Utter Sing Kaleewalla, Bhaee Nidhan Sing, Sirdar Khan Singh Majethea, Sirdar
Shumshere Sing, Sirdar Lall Sing Morarea, Sirdar Kehr Sing Sindhanwalla, Sirdar

Urjun Sing Rungurnungalea, acting with the unanimous consent and concurrence of
the Chiefs and Sirdars of the State assembled at Lahore.
Article 1. All and every part of the Treaty of peace between the British
Government and the State of Lahore, bearing date the 9th day of March, 1846,
except in so far as it may be temporarily modified in respect to Clause 15 of the said
Treaty by this engagement, shall remain binding upon the two Governments.
Article 2. A British officer, with an efficient establishment of assistants, shall be
appointed by the Governor-General to remain at Lahore, which officer shall have full
authority to direct and control all matters in every Department of the State.
Article 3. Every attention shall be paid in conducting the administration to the
feelings of the people, to preserving the national institutions and customs, and to
maintaining the just rights of all classes.
Article 4. Changes in the mode and details of administration shall not be made,
except when found necessary for effecting the objects set forth in the foregoing
Clause, and for securing the just dues of the Lahore Government. These details shall
be conducted by Native officers as at present, who shall be appointed and
superintended by a Council of Regency composed of leading Chiefs and Sirdars
acting under the control and guidance of the British Resident.
Article 5. The following persons shall in the first instance constitute the Council
of Regency, viz. , Sirdar Tej Sing, Sirdar Shere Sing Attareewalla, Dewan Deena
Nath, Fukeer Noorooddeen, Sirdar Runjore Sing Majeethea, Bhaee Nidhan Sing,
Sirdar Utter Sing Kaleewalla, Sirdar Shumshere Sing Sindhanwalla, and no change
shall be made in the persons thus nominated, without the consent of the British
Resident, acting under the orders of the Governor-General.
Article 6. The administration of the country shall be conducted by this Council
of Regency in such manner as may be determined on by themselves in consultation
with the British Resident, who shall have full authority to direct and control the
duties of every department.
Article 7. A British Force of such strength and numbers and in such positions as
the Governor-General may think fit, shall remain at Lahore for the protection of the
Maharajah and the preservation of the peace of the country.
Article 8. The Governor-General shall be at liberty to occupy with British
soldiers any fort or military post in the Lahore territories, the occupation of which
may be deemed necessary by the British Government, for the security of the capital
or for maintaining the peace of the country.
Article 9. The Lahore State shall pay to the British Government twenty-two
lakhs of new Nanuck Shahee Rupees of full tale and weight per annum for the
maintenance of this force, and to meet the expenses incurred by the British
Government. Such sum to be paid by two instalments, or 13, 20, 000 in May or
June, and 8, 80, 000 in November or December of each year.

Article 10. Inasmuch as it is fitting that Her Highness the Maharanee, the
mother of Maharaja Dulleep Sing, should have a proper provision made for the
maintenance of herself and dependants, the sum of one lakh and fifty thousand
rupees shall be set apart annually for that purpose, and shall be at Her Highness'
disposal.
Article 11. The provisions of this Engagement shall have effect during the
minority of His Highness Maharajah Dulleep Sing, and shall cease and terminate on
His Highness attaining the full age of sixteen years or, on the 4th September of the
year 1854, but it shall be competent to the Governor-General to cause the
arrangement to cease at any period prior to the coming of age of His Highness, at
which the Governor-General and the Lahore Durbar may be satisfied that the
interposition of the British Government is no longer necessary for maintaining the
Government of His Highness the Maharajah.

This agreement, consisting of eleven articles, was settled and executed at
Lahore by the Officers and Chiefs and Sirdars above named, on the 16th day of
December, 1846.
(Sd.) F. CURRIE
H. M. LAWRENCE
(Sd.) Sirdar Tej Sing (L. S.)
„
Sirdar Shere Sing (L. S.)
„
Dewan Deena Nath (L. S.)
„
Fukeer Nooroodeen (L. S.)
„
Rai Kishen Chund (L. S.)
„
Sirdar Runjore Sing Majethea (L. S.)
„
Sirdar Utter Sing Kalewalla (L. S.)
„
Bhaee Nidhan Sing (L. S.)
„
Sirdar Khan Sing Majethea (L. S.)
„
Sirdar Shumshere Sing (L. S.)
„
Sirdar Lal Sing Morarea (L. S.)
„
Sirdar Kher Sing Sindhanwalla (L. S.)
„
Sirdar Urjan Sing Rungurnungalea (L. S.)
(Sd.) Hardinge (L. S.)
(Sd.) Dulleep Sing (L. S.)

Ratified by the Right Honorable the Governor-General, at Bhyrowāl Ghat on the
left bank of the Beas, twenty-sixth day of December, One Thousand Eight Hundred
and Forty-Six.
(Sd.) F. CURRIE,
Secretary to the Government of India

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Hasrat, B. J. , Anglo-Sikh Relations. Hoshiarpur, 1968
Cunningham, Joseph Davey, A History of the Sikhs. London, 1849
Ganda Sngh, ed. , Private Correspondence Relating to the Anglo-Sikh Wars.
Amritsar, 1955
B. J. Hasrat

ANGLO-SIKH WAR I (1845-46), resulting in the partial subjugation of the Sikh
kingdom, was the outcome of British expansionism and the near-anarchical
conditions that overtook the Lahore court after the death of Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh in
June 1839. The English, by then firmly installed in Fīrozpur on the Sikh frontier,
about 70 km from Lahore, the Sikh capital, were watching the happenings across the
border with more than a neighbour's interest. The disorder that prevailed there
promised them a good opportunity for direct intervention.
Up to 1838, the British troops on the Sikh frontier had amounted to one
regiment at Sabāthū in the hills and two at Ludhiāṇā, with six pieces of artillery,
equalling in all about 2, 500 men. The total rose to 8, 000 during the time of Lord
Auckland (1836-42) who increased the number of troops at Ludhiāṇā and created a
new military post at Fīrozpur, which was actually part of Sikh dominions south of the
Sutlej. British military preparations for a war with the Sikhs began seriously in 1843
when the new governor-general, Lord Ellenborough (1842-44), discussed with the
Home government the possibilities of a military occupation of the Punjab. English
and Indian infantry reinforcement began arriving at each of the frontier posts of
Fīrozpur and Ludhiāṇā. Cavalry and artillery regiments moved up to Ambālā and
Kasaulī. Works were in the process of erection around the magazine at Fīrozpur, and
the fort at Ludhiāṇā began to be fortified. Plans for the construction of bridges over
the rivers Mārkaṇḍā and Ghaggar were prepared, and a new road link to join Meerut
and Ambālā was taken in hand. Exclusive of the newly constructed cantonments of
Kasaulī and Shimlā, Ellenborough had been able to collect a force of 11, 639 men
and 48 guns at Ambālā, Ludhiāṇā and Fīrozpur. "Everywhere, " wrote Lord
Ellenborough, "we are trying to get things in order and especially to strengthen and
equip the artillery with which the fight will be. " Seventy boats of thirty-five tons
each, with the necessary equipments to bridge the Sutlej at any point, were under
construction; fifty-six pontoons were on their way from Bombay for use in Sindh,
and two steamers were being constructed to ply on the River Sutlej. "In November
1845, " he informed the Duke of Wellington, "the army will be equal to any
operation. I should be sorry to have it called to the field sooner. "
In July 1844, Lord Ellenborough was replaced by Lord Hardinge (1844-48), a
Peninsula veteran, as governor-general of India. Hardinge further accelerated the
process of strengthening the Sutlej frontier for a war with the Sikhs. The affable
Colonel Richmond was replaced by the abrasive and belligerent Major-George
Broadfoot as the political agent on the Punjab frontier. Lord Gough, the commanderin-chief, established his headquarters at Ambālā. In October 1844, the British
military force on the frontier was 17, 000 infantry and 60 guns. Another 10, 000
troops were to be ready by the end of November. Fīrozpur's garrison strength under
the command of Sir John Littler was raised to 7, 000; by January 1845, the total
British force amounted to 20, 000 men and 60 guns. "We can collect, " Hardinge
reported to the Home government, "33, 000 infantry, 6, 000 cavalry and 100 guns in
six weeks. " In March additional British and Indian regiments were quietly moved to
Fīrozpur, Ludhiāṇā and Ambālā. Field batteries of pounders with horses or bullocks
to draw them, and 24 additional pieces of heavy ordnance were on their way to the
frontier. In addition, 600 elephants to draw the battering train of 24-pounder
batteries had reached Āgrā, and 7, 000 camels between Kānpur and the Sutlej were
to move up in the summer to Fīrozpur, which was to be the concentration point for a
forward offensive movement.

Lord Hardinge, blamed unnecessarily by the Home government for inadequate
military preparations for the first Sikh war, had, during the seventeen months
between Ellenborough's departure and the commencement of hostilities with the
Sikhs, increased the garrison strength at Fīrozpur from 4, 596 men and 12 guns to
10, 472 men and 24 guns; at Ambālā from 4, 113 men and 24 guns to 12, 972 men
and 32 guns; at Ludhiāṇā from 3, 030 men and 12 guns to 7, 235 men and 12 guns,
and at Meerut from 5, 573 men and 18 guns to 9, 844 men and 24 guns. The
relevant strength of the advanced armies, including those at the hill stations of
Sabāthū and Kasaulī, was raised from 24, 000 men and 66 guns to 45, 500 men and
98 guns. . These figures are based on official British papers, particularly Hardinge's
private correspondence on Punjab affairs with his predecessor, Lord Ellenborough.
In addition to the concentration of troops on the border, an elaborate supply
depot was setup by the British at Bassīāṅ, near Rāikoṭ, in Ludhiāṇā district. The
Lahore Darbār's vakils or representatives and newswriters in the cis-Sutlej region
sent alarming reports of these large-scale British military movements across the
border. The Sikhs were deeply wrought upon by these war preparations, especially
by Broadfoot's acts of hostility. The rapid march in November 1845 of the governorgeneral towards the frontier and a report of Sir Charles Napier's speech in the Delhi
Gazette saying that the British were going to war with the Sikhs filled Lahore with
rumours of invasion. The Sikh ranks, alerted to the danger of a British offensive,
started their own preparations. Yet the army pañches or regimental representatives,
who had taken over the affairs of the Lahore forces into their own hands after the
death of Wazīr Jawāhar Siṅgh, were at this time maintaining, according to George
Campbell, a British civilian employed in the cis-Sutlej territory, Memoirs of My Indian
Career, "wonderful order at Lahore. . . and almost puritanical discipline in the
military republic. "
However, the emergence of the army pañchāyats as a new centre of power
greatly perturbed the British authority who termed it as "an unholy alliance between
the republican army and the Darbar. " In this process the Sikh army had indeed
been transformed. It had now assumed the role of the Khālsā. It worked through
elected regimental committees, declaring that Gurū Gobind Siṅgh's ideal of the Sikh
commonwealth had been revived, with the Sarbatt Khālsā or the Sikh Panth as a
whole assuming all executive, military and civil authority in the State. The British
decried this as "the dangerous military democracy of the Panchayat system, " in
which "the soldiers were in a state of successful mutiny. "
When the British agent made a reference to the Lahore Darbār about military
preparations in the Punjab, it replied that they were only defensive measures to
counter the designs of the British. The Darbār, on the other hand, asked for the
return of the treasure estimated at over seventeen lakh of rupees the Lahore
grandee Suchet Siṅgh Ḍogrā had left buried in Fīrozpur, the restoration of the village
of Mauṛāṅ granted by Mahārājā Raṇjīt Siṅgh to one of his generals, Hukam Siṅgh
Malvaī, but subsequently resumed by the ruler of Nābhā with the active connivance
of the British, and free passage for the Punjab armed constabulary-a right that had
been acknowledged by the British on paper but more often than not denied in
practice. The British government rejected the Darbār's claims and severed diplomatic
relations with it. The armies under Hugh Gough and Lord Hardinge began
proceeding towards Fīrozpur. To forestall their joining those at Fīrozpur, the Sikh
army began to cross the Sutlej on 11 December 1845 near Harīke Pattaṇ into its

own territory on the other side of the river. The crossing over the Sutlej by Sikhs
was made a pretext by the British for opening hostilities and on 13 December
Governor-General Lord Hardinge issued a proclamation announcing war on the
Sikhs. The declaration charged the State of Lahore with violation of the treaty of
friendship of 1809 and justified British preparations as merely precautionary
measures for the protection of the Sutlej frontier. The British simultaneously
declared Sikh possessions on the left bank of the Sutlej forfeit.
Hesitation and indecision marred Sikh military operations. Having crossed the
Sutlej with five divisions, each 8, 000-12, 000 strong, an obvious strategy for them
would have been to move forward. They did in a bold sweeping movement first
encircle Fīrozpur, then held by Sir John Littler with only 7, 000 men, but withdrew
without driving the advantage home and dispersed their armies in a wide semicircle
from Harīke to Mudkī and thence to Ferozeshāh, 16 km southeast of Fīrozpur. The
abandonment of Fīrozpur as a first target was the result of the treachery of the Sikh
prime minister, Lāl Siṅgh, who was in treasonable communication with Captain Peter
Nicholson, the assistant political agent of the British. He asked the tatter's advice
and was told not to attack Fīrozpur. This instruction he followed seducing the Sikhs
with an ingenious excuse that, instead of falling upon an easy prey, the Khālsā
should exalt their fame by captivity or the death of the Lāṭ Sāhib (the governorgeneral) himself. A division precipitately moved towards Ludhiāṇā also remained
inactive long enough to lose the benefit of the initiative. The Khālsā army had
crossed the Sutlej borne on a wave of popular enthusiasm; it was equally matched if
not superior to the British force. Its soldiers had the will and determination to fight
or die, but not its commanders. There was no unity among them, and each of them
seemed to act as he thought best. Drift was the policy deliberately adopted by them.
On 18 December, the Sikhs came in touch with British army which arrived
under Sir Hugh Gough, the commander-in-chief, from Ludhiāṇā. A battle took place
at Mudkī, 32 km from Fīrozpur. Lāl Siṅgh, who headed the Sikh attack, deserted his
army and fled the field when the Sikhs stood firm in their order, fighting in a resolute
and determined manner. The leaderless Sikhs fought a grim hand-to-hand battle
against the more numerous enemy led by the most experienced commanders in the
world. The battle continued with unabated fury till midnight (and came thereafter to
be known as "Midnight Mudki"). The Sikhs retired with a loss of 17 guns while the
British suffered heavy causalities amounting to 872 killed and wounded, including
Quartermaster-General Sir Robert Sale, Sir John McGaskill and Brigadier Boulton.
Reinforcements were sent for from Ambālā, Meerut and Delhi. Lord Hardinge,
unmindful of his superior position of governor-general, offered to become second-incommand to his commander-in-chief.
The second action was fought three days later, on 21 December at
Ferozeshāh, 16 km both from Mudkī and Fīrozpur. The governor-general and the
commander-in-chief, assisted by reinforcements led by General Littler from Fīrozpur,
made an attack upon the Sikhs who were awaiting them behind strong
entrenchments. The British - 16, 700 men and 69 guns - tried to overrun the Sikhs in
one massive cavalry, infantry and artillery onslaught, but the assault was stubbornly
resisted. Sikhs' batteries fired with rapidity and precision. There was confusion in the
ranks of the English and their position became increasingly critical. The growing
darkness of the frosty winter night reduced them to sore straits. The battle of
Ferozeshāh is regarded as one of the most fiercely contested battles fought by the

British in India. During that "night of horrors, " the commander-in-chief
acknowledged, "we were in a critical and perilous state. " Counsels of retreat and
surrender were raised and despair struck the British camp. In the words of General
Sir Hope Grant, Sir Henry Hardinge thought it was all up and gave his sword - a
present from the Duke of Wellington - and which once belonged to Napoleon and his
Star of the Bath to his son, with directions to proceed to Fīrozpur, remarking that "if
the day were lost, he must fall. "
Lāl Siṅgh and Tej Siṅgh again came to the rescue of the English. The former
suddenly deserted the Khālsā army during the night and the latter the next morning
(22 December) which enabled the British to turn defeat into victory. The British loss
was again heavy, 694 killed and 1, 721 wounded. The number of casualties among
officers was comparatively higher. The Sikhs lost about 2, 000 men and 73 pieces of
artillery.
A temporary cessation of hostilities followed the battle of Ferozeshāh. The
English were not in a position to assume the offensive and waited for heavy guns
and reinforcements to arrive from Delhi. Lāl Siṅgh and Tej Siṅgh allowed them the
much needed respite inasmuch as they kept the Sikhs from recrossing the Sutlej. To
induce desertions, Lord Hardinge issued a proclamation on the Christmas day
inviting all natives of Hindustan to quit the service of the Sikh State on pain of
forfeiting their property and to claim protection from the British government. The
deserters were also offered liberal rewards and pensions.
A Sikh sardār, Raṇjodh Siṅgh Majīṭhīā, crossed the Sutlej in force and was
joined by Ajīt Siṅgh, of Lāḍvā, from the other side of the river. They marched
towards Ludhīāṇā and burnt a portion of the cantonment. Sir Harry Smith
(afterwards Governor of Cape Colony), who was sent to relieve Ludhiāṇā, marched
eastwards from Fīrozpur, keeping a few miles away from the Sutlej. Raṇjodh Siṅgh
Majīṭhīā harried Smith's column and, when Smith tried to make a detour at
Baddovāl, attacked his rear with great vigour and captured his baggage train and
stores (21 January). But Harry Smith retrieved his position a week later by inflicting
a defeat on Raṇjodh Siṅgh Majīṭhīā and Ajīt Siṅgh, of Lāḍvā, (28 January).
The last battle of the campaign took place on 10 February. To check the
enemy advance on Lahore, a large portion of the Sikh army was entrenched in a
horse-shoe curve on the Sutlej near the village of Sabhrāoṅ, under the command of
Tej Siṅgh while the cavalry battalions and the dreaded ghoṛchaṛās under Lāl Siṅgh
were a little higher up the river. Entrenchments at Sabhrāoṅ were on the left bank of
the Sutlej with a pontoon bridge connecting them with their base camp. Their big
guns were placed behind high embankments and consequently immobilized for
offensive action. The infantry was also posted behind earthworks and could not,
therefore, be deployed to harass the opponents.
Early in February, the British received ample stores of ammunition from Delhi.
Lāl Siṅgh had already passed on to the English officers the required clues for an
effective assault. Gough and Hardinge now decided to make a frontal attack on
Sabhrāoṅ and destroy the Darbār army at one blow. A heavy mist hung over the
battlefield, enveloping both contending armies. As the sun broke through the mist,
the Sikhs found themselves encircled between two horse-shoes: facing them were
the British and behind them was the Sutlej, now in spate. After a preliminary artillery

duel, British cavalry made a feint to check on the exact location of the Sikh guns.
The cannonade was resumed, and in two hours British guns put the Darbār artillery
out of action. Then the British charged Sikh entrenchments from three sides.
Tej Siṅgh fled across the pontoon bridge as soon as the contest started and
had it destroyed making reinforcement or return of Sikh soldiers impossible. Gulāb
Siṅgh Ḍogrā stopped sending supplies and rations from Lahore. Lāl Siṅgh's
ghoṛchaṛās did not put in their appearance at Sabhrāoṅ. In the midst of these
treacheries, a Sikh warrior, Shām Siṅgh Aṭārīvālā, symbolizing the unflinching will of
the Khālsā, vowed to fight unto the last and fall in battle rather than retire in defeat.
He rallied the ranks depleted by desertions. His courage inspired the Sikhs to make a
determined bid to save the day, but the odds were against them. Shām Siṅgh fell
fighting in the foremost ranks along with his dauntless comrades. The British
casualties at Sabhrāoṅ were 2, 403 killed ; the Sikhs lost 3, 125 men in the action
and all their guns were either captured or abandoned in the river. Captain J. D.
Cunningham, who was present as an additional aide-de-camp to the governorgeneral, describes the last scene of the battle vividly in his A History of the Sikhs:
. . . although assailed on either side by squadrons of horse and battalions of
foot, no Sikh offered to submit, and no disciple of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh asked for
quarter. They everywhere showed a front to the victors, and stalked slowly and
sullenly away, while many rushed singly forth to meet assured death by contending
with a multitude. The victors looked with stolid wonderment upon the indomitable
courage of the vanquished. . . .
Lord Hugh Gough, the British commander-in-chief, under whose leadership the
two Anglo-Sikh wars were fought, described Sabhrāoṅ as the Waterloo of India.
Paying tribute to the gallantry of the Sikhs, he said :
Policy precluded me publicly recording my sentiments on the splendid gallantry
of our fallen foe, or to record
the acts of heroism displayed, not only individually, but almost collectively, by
the Sikh sardars and the army; and I declare were it not from a deep conviction that
my country's good required the sacrifice, I could have wept to have witnessed the
fearful slaughter of so devoted a body of men.
Lord Hardinge, who saw the action, wrote:
Few escaped; none, it may be said, surrendered. The Sikhs met their fate with
the resignation which distinguishes their race.

Two days after their victory at Sabhrāoṅ, British forces crossed the Sutlej and
occupied Kasūr. The Lahore Darbār empowered Gulāb Siṅgh Ḍogrā, who had earlier
come down to Lahore with regiments of hillmen, to negotiate a treaty of peace. The
wily Gulāb Siṅgh first obtained assurances from the army pañches that they would
agree to the terms he made and then tendered the submission of the Darbār to Lord
Hardinge. The governor-general, realizing that the Sikhs were far from vanquished,
forbore from immediate occupation of the country. By the terms imposed by the

victorious British through the peace treaty of 9 March, the Lahore Darbār was
compelled to give up Jalandhar Doāb, pay a war indemnity amounting to a million
and a half sterling, reduce its army to 20, 000 infantry and 12, 000 cavalry, hand
over all the guns used in the war and relinquish control of both banks of the Sutlej
to the British. A further condition was added two days later on 11 March: the posting
of a British unit in Lahore till the end of the year on payment of expenses. The
Darbār was unable to pay the full war indemnity and ceded in lieu thereof the hill
territories between the Beās and the Indus. Kashmīr was sold to Gulāb Siṅgh Ḍogrā
for 75 lakh rupees. A week later, on 16 March, another treaty was signed at Amritsar
recognizing him as Mahārājā of Jammū and Kashmīr. Although Mahārāṇī Jind Kaur
continued to act as the regent and Rājā Lāl Siṅgh as wazīr of the minor Mahārājā
Duleep Siṅgh, effective power had passed into the hands of the British resident,
Colonel Henry Lawrence.
B. J. Hasrat

ANGLO-SIKH WAR II (1848-49), which resulted in the abrogation of the Sikh
kingdom of the Punjab, was virtually a campaign by the victors of the first AngloSikh war (1945-46) and since then the de facto rulers of the State finally to
overcome the resistance of some of the sardārs who chafed at the defeat in the
earlier war which, they believed, had been lost owing to the treachery on the part of
the commanders at the top and not to any lack of fighting strength of the Sikh army.
It marked also the fulfilment of the imperialist ambition of the new governorgeneral, Lord Dalhousie (1848-56), to carry forward the British flag up to the natural
boundary of India on the northwest. According to the peace settlement of March
1846, at the end of Anglo-Sikh war I, the British force in Lahore was to be
withdrawn at the end of the year, but a severer treaty was imposed on the Sikhs
before the expiry of that date. Sir Henry Hardinge, the then governor-general, had
his Agent, Frederick Currie, persuade the Lahore Darbār to request the British for the
continuance of the troops in Lahore. According to the treaty which was consequently
signed at Bharovāl on 16 December 1846, Henry Lawrence was appointed Resident
with "full authority to direct and control all matters in every department of the State.
" A Council of Regency, consisting of the nominees of the Resident and headed by
Tej Siṅgh, was appointed. The power to make changes in its personnel vested in the
Resident. Under another clause the British could maintain as many troops in the
Punjab as they thought necessary for the preservation of peace and order. This
treaty was to remain in operation until the minor Mahārājā Duleep Siṅgh attained
the age of 16. By a proclamation issued in July 1847, the governor-general further
enhanced the powers of the Resident.
On 23 October 1847, Sir Henry Hardinge wrote to Henry Lawrence :
In all our measures taken during the minority we must bear in mind that by
the treaty of Lahore, March 1846, the Punjab never was intended to be an
independent State. By the clause I added the chief of the State can neither make
war or peace, or exchange or sell an acre of territory or admit a European officer, or
refuse us a thoroughfare through his territories, or, in fact, perform any act without
our permission. In fact the native Prince is in fetters, and under our protection and
must do our bidding.

In the words of British historian John Clark Marshman, "an officer of the
Company's artillery became, in fact, the successor to Ranjit Singh. " The Sikhs
resented this gradual liquidation of their authority in the Punjab. The new
government at Lahore became totally unpopular. The abolition of jāgīrs in the
Jalandhar Doāb and changes introduced in the system of land revenue and its
collection angered the landed classes. Mahārāṇī Jind Kaur, who was described by
Lord Dalhousie as the only woman in the Punjab with manly understanding and in
whom the British Resident foresaw a rallying point for the well-wishers of the Sikh
dynasty, was kept under close surveillance. Henry Lawrence laid down that she
could not receive in audience more than five or six sardārs in a month and that she
remain in purdah like the ladies of the royal families of Nepal, Jodhpur and Jaipur.
In January 1848, Henry Lawrence took leave of absence and travelled back
home with Lord Hardinge, who had completed his term in India. The former was
replaced by Frederick Currie and the latter by the Earl of Dalhousie. The new regime

confronted a rebellion in the Sikh province of Multān which it utilized as an excuse
for the annexation of the Punjab. The British Resident at Lahore increased the levy
payable by the Multān governor, Dīwān Mūl Rāj, who, finding himself unable to
comply, resigned his office. Frederick Currie appointed General Kāhn Siṅgh Mān in
his place and sent him to Multān along with two British officers, P. A. Vans Agnew
and William Anderson, to take charge from Mūl Rāj. The party arrived at Multān on
18 April 1848, and the Dīwān vacated the Fort and made over the keys to the
representatives of the Lahore Darbār. But his soldiers rebelled and the British
officers were set upon in their camp and killed. This was the beginning of the Multān
outbreak. Some soldiers of the Lahore escort deserted their officers and joined Mūl
Rāj's army. Currie received the news at Lahore on 21 April, but delayed action. Lord
Dalhousie allowed the Multān rebellion to spread for five months. The interval was
utilized by the British further to provoke Sikh opinion. The Resident did his best to
fan the flames of rebellion. Mahārāṇī Jind Kaur, then under detention in the Fort of
Sheikhūpurā, was exiled from the Punjab. She was taken to Fīrozpur and thence to
Banāras, in the British dominions. Her annual allowance, which according to the
treaty of Bharovāl had been fixed at one and a half lakh of rupees, was reduced to
twelve thousand. Her jewellery worth fifty thousand of rupees was forfeited; so was
her cash amounting to a lakh and a half. The humiliating treatment of the Mahārāṇī
caused deep resentment among the people of the Punjab. Even the Muslim ruler of
Afghanistan, Amīr Dost Muhammad, protested to the British, saying that "such
treatment is objectionable to all creeds. "
Meanwhile, Lieutenant Herbert Edwardes, the Resident's Assistant at Bannū,
having heard of the Multān revolt, began raising levies from among the Paṭhān
mercenaries, and after summoning Van Cortlandt, the local Lahore commander,
marched on Multān and called upon the rebels to submit. Although the British
Resident approved of Edwardes' conduct, Lord Dalhousie was furious at the audacity
of a "subaltern officer" to invest Multān without any authority and offer terms to Mūl
Rāj. He was severely reprimanded and ordered not to extend his operations any
further. However, Edwardes was not discouraged and ignoring these orders, he
crossed the Indus on 14 June; four days later, he inflicted a crushing defeat on Mūl
Rāj's forces at Kinerī. Edwardes' action turned Sikh national sentiment in favour of
Mūl Rāj and there was restiveness among the troops. British forces began to be
moved towards the frontier. The Lahore garrison was reinforced; likewise more
regiments reached Ambālā and Fīrozpur. By June 1848, an army had been
assembled at the frontier - 11, 740 men in the Bārī Doāb, 9, 430 in the Jalandhar
Doāb; in all 21, 170 men ready to go into action against Multān to quell what was no
more than a local rising. Meanwhile, Captain James Abbott, the Resident's assistant
at Hazārā, suspecting that Sardār Chatar Siṅgh Aṭārīvālā, the governor of the
province, had been hatching a conspiracy to lead a general Sikh uprising against the
British, charged him with treason and cut off all communication with him and
marched against him the Muslim peasantry and tribal mercenaries. Captain
Nicholson who conducted an enquiry into Abbott's allegations, exonerated Chatar
Siṅgh of the charge of treason, but offered him terms which amounted to his virtual
dismissal and the confiscation of his jāgīrs. Chatar Siṅgh rejected these. Abbott's
treatment of Chatar Siṅgh, a chief of eminence and position since Raṇjīt Siṅgh's time
and whose daughter was betrothed to the young Mahārājā Duleep Siṅgh, was
humiliating. Chatar Siṅgh's son, Rājā Sher Siṅgh, who had steadfastly fought on the
side of Herbert Edwardes against Dīwān Mūl Rāj, was greatly exercised, and he
joined hands with the Dīwān's force on 14 September 1848.

Rājā Sher Siṅgh made a passionate appeal to his countrymen warning them of
the fate that awaited the Punjab and inviting them to join his standard in a final bid
to preserve their freedom. Many old soldiers of the Khālsā army responded to the
call and left their homes to rally round Dīwān Mūl Rāj, Rājā Sher Siṅgh and Chatar
Siṅgh. Lord Dalhousie received the news of Sher Siṅgh's action with unconcealed
pleasure because it had brought matters to the crisis that he had for months been
awaiting. At a public banquet on 5 October 1848 at Barrackpore (Calcutta), he
announced :
Unwarned by precedents, uninfluenced by example, the Sikh nation has called
for war, and, on my word, Sirs, they shall have it with a vengeance. . . . We are now
not on the eve but in the midst of war with the Sikh nation and the kingdom of the
Punjab. . . . I have drawn the sword, and have thrown away the scabbard, both in
relation to the war immediately before us, and to the stern policy which that war
must precede and establish.

The Resident at Lahore found this position legally indefensible and practically
untenable. He and his staff were there to superintend and aid the administration of
the Sikh State and to look after the interests of the ruler, Mahārājā Duleep Siṅgh,
during the period of his minority. The Lahore Darbār and the Mahārājā had
supported the Resident in all his efforts to deal with the situation in Multān and
Hazārā. Still the British armies were marched without an open declaration of war
towards the Punjab. Lord Hugh Gough, the commander-in-chief, left his
headquarters at Shimlā towards the end of October and a huge army was assembled
at Fīrozpur in the beginning of November. The army consisted of four columns. Lord
Gough personally commanded 22 infantry divisions (14, 419 men), a cavalry division
(3, 369 horse) and an artillery division with 66 guns, including ten 18-pounder
batteries and six 8-inch howitzers drawn by elephants. In addition, there were 6
troops of horse artillery and 3 light and 2 heavy field batteries. Its total strength
amounted to 24, 404 men (6, 396 Europeans). At Lahore, General Wheeler's
Occupation Force of 10, 000 men held firmly the capital of the Sikhs. In front of the
citadel of Multān was the Ist Infantry Division under Major-General Whish. The
arrival of the Bombay column under Brigadier-General Henry Dundas had
augmented its strength to over 21, 000 men of all arms. In addition 5, 300 men of
the Lahore infantry were under British control at Multān. This brought the total
regular force at the disposal of Major-General Whish at Multān to 26, 300 men.
Besides, there were irregular Muslim levies and mercenaries raised by the British to
fight the Sikhs. Taken in all these and other troops at Hazārā, Peshāwar, Bannū,
Gobindgaṛh, Jalandhar and Hoshiārpur added up to the total of 1, 04, 666 men-61,
366 of regular British army, 5, 300 of the Lahore army and 38, 000 irregular troops;
13, 524 cavalry, 123 field and 22 heavy guns, all deployed at various points in the
Punjab.
The numerical strength of the Sikhs was comparatively much smaller. Lord
Gough's despatches enumerate the Sikh force at Rāmnagar and Cheliāṅvālā between
30, 000 and 40, 000 men and at Gujrāt 60, 000 men and 60 guns, which figures are
highly exaggerated. The powerful Khālsā army of Raṇjīt Siṅgh was broken up after
its capitulation at Sabhrāoṅ in 1846. Its soldiers had been disbanded by the British,
its generals discharged or won over, and its jāgīrdārī force reduced to starvation. A

skeleton army of 25 battalions (20, 000 men) and 12, 000 horse permitted to the
State under the treaty of March 1846 was a shadow force under British control and
dispersed to far-flung districts for garrison duty. Lahore had a garrison strength of 6,
500 men, Peshāwar of 3, 000 men, Gobindgaṛh Fort 2, 000 men, Hazārā 3, 000
men, Bannū and Ṭoṅk 1, 300 men, Attock 700 men, and Kohāṭ 500 men. The
remaining 3, 000 men of the entire force were at numerous small posts throughout
the Punjab.
The contingents of the Lahore army which joined the rebels were those of
Hazāra, Peshāwar, Ṭoṅk and Bannū, Kohāṭ, and Attock - 9, 400 men, inclusive of the
force of Sher Siṅgh at Multān (900 infantry and 3, 400 horse). Allowing that 3, 000
men stationed at various isolated places throughout the Punjab could get through
and join the rebels in the north, the regular Sikh force could scarcely have exceeded
13, 000 men and 9, 000 horse. Disbanded Sikh soldiers and the freelance who
flocked round the banner did not exceed 10, 000 men. The disbanded soldiery
merely augmented the numerical strength of the Khālsā it had few generals and
fewer arms and no means of procurement of arms and supplies. The total strength
thus could not have been more than 23, 000 men and 12, 000 horse.
Lord Gough crossed the Sutlej on 9 November and reached Lahore on 13
November. Moving rapidly into the Rachnā Doāb, he arrived at Rāmnagar on 22
November. Sher Siṅgh's entire force was on the right bank of the River Chenāb.
Brigadier-General Campbell with the 3rd Infantry Division (8, 171 men) was ordered
to move out to disperse the Sikh force in the vicinity of Rāmnagar; Brigadier-General
Cureton in command of the cavalry accompanied Campbell's force. On arrival at
Rāmnagar, Campbell found the Sikh force on the opposite side of the river. Cureton
had numerous cavalry but no guns; he ordered the horse artillery under Colonel
Lane to overtake the withdrawing Sikh troops through the sandy riverbed, but met
with disaster. The Sikh artillery on the opposite bank opened up with disastrous
effect, and Lane hastily withdrew the horse artillery leaving behind a heavy gun and
two ammunition wagons, which the Sikhs captured. Suddenly, a column of the Sikh
cavalry crossed the river under cover of artillery. The commander of the 14th Light
Dragoons who led a squardon in support of Lane's horse artillery was shot dead. The
charge failed and the British lost 90 officers and men including Brigadier-General
Cureton and Lieutenant-Colonel Havelock, and 140 horse. The action at Rāmnagar
was a victory for the Sikhs. Lord Dalhousie blamed both Campbell and Gough for the
"sad affair" from which "there was no objective to be gained. " Gough, on the other
hand, claimed it as a victory. "The enemy, " he announced in a General Order, "was
signally overthrown on every occasion, and only saved from utter annihilation by
their flight to the cover of their guns on the opposite bank. "
For about a week after the British reverse, the two armies faced each other
across the river. Lord Gough waited impatiently for the heavy guns to arrive. On 30
November, he detached a force under Major-General Thackwell across the river to
take the Sikh army in the flank; another brigade of infantry under Brigadier Godby
was ordered to ford the river 10 km from Rāmnagar to support Thackwell's force.
Across the river, at the principal ford 3 km from Rāmnagar, Sher Siṅgh's entire force,
now risen to 12, 000 men and 28 guns, lay strongly entrenched. Thackwell's force
moved about 30 km up the river to Wazīrābād and made the crossing, while Godby's
brigade had crossed the river 25 km below. At midday on 3 December Thackwell
arrived at Sadullāpur barely 6 km from the Sikh encampment. The Sikhs realized the

imminent danger to their flanks and rear. The heavy Sikh artillery opened fire at
Thackwell's position, while the Sikh cavalry barred the passage of Godby's force
which failed to join up with his troops. At dusk, the entire Sikh army crossed over to
the left bank of the river. Sher Siṅgh's action nullified the British manoeuvre; it also
made it possible for Chatar Siṅgh's force to join him. The British General claimed a
victory without a battle. He reported a meagre loss of 40 men at Sadullāpur, and
claimed that the army under his command had upheld the tradition of valour. The
Sikhs, he reported, were in full retreat, leaving behind some 60 boats which had
been captured.
In British military and political circles in England, Lord Gough was severely
castigated for lack of drive and initiative. Lord Dalhousie openly charged him with
incompetency and blamed him for incomplete actions and enormous losses. Under
the shadow of these adverse strictures, Lord Gough fought the battle of Chelīāṅvālā
on 13 January 1849. The Sikh army 12, 000 strong was drawn in battle array in the
dense jungle in front, their heavy guns bearing upon Chelīāṅvālā, on the River
Jehlum. British preparations for encampment were rudely interrupted by sharp Sikh
artillery fire. Lord Gough hesitated, but instantly drew up the order of the battle. In
the centre were placed heavy 18-pounders and 8-inch howitzers; Major-General
Gilbert's 2nd Infantry Division (5, 248 men) was placed on the right, flanked by
Brigadier Pope's 2nd Cavalry Brigade and 14th Light Dragoons and horse artillery. To
the left was Brigadier-General Campbell's 3rd Infantry Division (8, 171 men) flanked
by White's Ist Cavalry Brigade and 3 troops of horse artillery.
The British guns started firing upon the Sikh centre. The density of the jungle
made it impossible to preserve order and formation and the British brigades and
regiments got separated from one another. The ground proved unsuitable for
cavalry action, and the artillery failed to provide cover. Sikhs fought with
determination and their artillery took a heavy toll. The British infantrymen were
mowed down by fire from Sikh musketry, and the successive onslaughts of the Sikh
ghoṛchaṛās broke the British cavalry line. While Campbell's charge failed to dislodge
the Sikhs, the Khālsā horsemen swept the field like lightning raising vociferous
Khālsā war-cries.
In another direction, Brigadier Pennycuick's brigade moving in double time into
the jungle, was routed by Sikh artillery. The brigade turned back to flee from the
destructive fire of shot and shell leaving behind nearly half a regiment which faced
total destruction. The most serious disaster befell Gilbert's division which halted in
utter bewilderment when a large body of Sikhs surrounded the 2nd Infantry brigade.
Gilbert's brigade had neither the cover of guns nor the support of cavalry. In the
hand-to-hand fight, the brigade was repulsed and driven back with heavy loss. The
battle lasted over three hours when Lord Gough ordered the whole army to retreat.
British casualties in the action amounted to 2, 446 men and 132 officers killed with
four guns lost.
The British commander-in-chief claimed a victory, which claim the governorgeneral scornfully dubbed as "perhaps poetical. " "We have gained a victory, " he
observed ruefully, "like that of the ancients; it is such a one that 'another such would
ruin us. ' "There was an outburst of popular indignation in England and Gough was
squarely blamed for the defeat of the British. Military experts at home described him
as a "superannuated general who could not mount his horse without assistance. " It

was decided to retire Lord Gough and replace him by Sir Charles Napier. In the
meantime, however, Multān fell and Dīwān Mūl Rāj surrendered to Major-General
Whish on 22 January 1849.
Lord Gough repaired his reputation in the battle of Gujrāt fought on 21
February 1849. The Sikh army had regrouped on the banks of the Jehlum. On 15
February, it arrived at Gujrāt where Chatar Siṅgh's force and an Afghān contingent
of 3, 000 horse under Akram Khān encircled the town. On 13 February, MajorGeneral Whish's Ist Division (13, 400 men and 30 pieces of heavy artillery) joined
the British force. The Bombay column (12, 100 men and 3, 000 cavalry) joined a few
days later. Thus assured of an overwhelming superiority of men and heavy artillery,
Lord Gough ordered the entire force forward and reaching a few days later Shādīvāl,
a village 8 km from Gujrāt, he found himself face to face with the Sikhs.
The battle of Gujrāt must be reckoned as one of the most notable in the annals
of British warfare in India. Never, perhaps, the British had amassed so many guns
and men in any single battle. The British army now consisted of 56, 636 men - four
infantry divisions, 11, 569 horse, 96 field-guns, and 67 siege-guns including ten 18pounders and six 8-inch howitzers drawn by elephants. For this obvious reason the
battle of Gujrāt has often been described as "the battle of guns. "
On the morning of 21 February, the whole British army advanced with the
precision of a parade movement. The Sikh guns opened fire, thus disclosing their
positions and range. The British General brought the three divisions to a sudden halt
and ordered the whole line of artillery to fire. The sustained cannonade of 100 guns,
the fire of 18-pounders and 8-inch howitzers, which continued for two hours blunted
Sikh artillery. When the British guns had spent up their fury, their infantry line
advanced rapidly. The Sikh infantry positions were captured, and the Sikhs driven
out of cover. The battle was over within a few hours. The advance of the whole
British line completely overwhelmed the Sikhs and they fled the field in confusion.
Their loss was estimated between 3, 000 and 5, 000 men and 53 guns; the British
casualties were 96 killed and 700 wounded. "The Sikhs, " commented Lord
Dalhousie, "displayed the skill, courage and activity which belong to their race. "
With the decisive British victory at Gujrāt the hostilities ended on 11 March 1849.
Sher Siṅgh and Chatar Siṅgh formally surrendered their swords to Major-General
Gilbert near Rāwalpiṇḍī. They were followed on the 14th by the whole Sikh army.
"Today is Raṇjīt Siṅgh dead, " sighed the soldiers as they kissed their swords and
laid them down on the ever-enlarging heap of steel.
Lord Dalhousie proclaimed annexation of the Punjab on 29 March 1849. His
foreign secretary, Henry Meirs Elliot, arrived at Lahore to obtain the signatures of
the members of the Council of Regency and of the minor king, Mahārājā Duleep
Siṅgh. A darbār was held in the Lahore Fort and, with the British troops lined up on
his right and his helpless sardārs on his left, the young Duleep Siṅgh affixed his
signatures to the document which deprived him of his crown and kingdom.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Ganda Singh, Private Correspondence Relating to the Anglo-Sikh Wars.
Amritsar, 1955
The British Occupation of the Punjab. Patiala, 1956

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Cook, H. C. B. , The Sikh Wars 1845-49. Delhi, 1975
Gough, Sir C. and A. D. Innes, The Sikhs and the Sikh Wars. London, 1897
Burton, R. G. , The First and the Second Sikh Wars. Simla, 1911
Cunningham, Joseph Davey, A History of the Sikhs from the Origin of the
Nation to the Battles of the Sutlej. London, 1849
Khushwant Singh, A History of the Sikhs, vol. 2. Princeton 1966
Harbans Singh, The Heritage of the Sikhs. Delhi, 1983
Nijjar, B. S. , Anglo-Sikh Wars. Delhi, 1976
Hasrat, Bikrama Jit, Anglo-Sikh Relations 1799-1849. Hoshiarpur, 1968
The Punjab Papers. Hoshiarpur, 1970
Gupta, Hari Ram, Panjab on the Eve of First Sikh War. Chandigarh, 1956
B. J. Hasrat

AṆĪ RĀI, author of Jaṅgnāmā Gurū Gobind Siṅgh Jī was one of the numerous poets
and scholars who enjoyed the patronage of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh (1666-1708). The
Jaṅgnāmā is an account in verse of a battle on the banks of the River Sutlej in which
an attack from the imperial troops was countered and repulsed by Sikhs under the
personal command of Gurū Gobind Siṅgh. No date is given of the event, but a
reference in the text to "Khālsā, " inaugurated in 1699, and other details indicate
that it was one of the last battles of Anandpur. A manuscript of the work is
preserved in the private collection of the Mahārājā of Paṭiālā. The poem has been
included by the Shiromaṇī Gurdwārā Parbandhak Committee in the collection Prāchīn
Vārāṅ te Jaṅgnāme, and by Bhāshā Vibhāg, Punjab, in Pañch Nad. The poet has
tried several prosodic measures in the 70-stanza poem. The language used is
bhākhā, or contemporary Hindi, except in the pauṛīs which are in chaste Punjabi.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.

Padam, Piārā Siṅgh, Gurū Gobind Siṅgh Jī de Darbārī Ratan. Patiala, 1976
Kuir Siṅgh, Gurbilās Pātshāhī 10. Patiala, 1968
Piārā Siṅgh Padam

AṆĪ RĀI, BĀBĀ (b. 1618), son of Gurū Hargobind, was, according to Gurbilās
Chhevīṅ Pātshāhī born to Mātā Nānakī at Amritsar on 16 Maghar 1675 Bk/14
November 1618. The first to arrive to see the child's face was grandmother, Mātā
Gaṅgā, and she was the most rejoiced of all the family. Gurū Hargobind, to quote
the Gurbilās again, gave him the name Aṇī Rāi (aṇi, Skt. anīk = troops, army;
rāi=rājā or chief), Lord of Armies. As he grew up, Aṇī Rāi remained absorbed within
himself most of the time. He never married and lived the life of a recluse. All we
learn from the biographer of Gurū Hargobind is that he carried the conch at the
funeral of his stepmother (Mātā Marvāhī), his stepbrother, Sūraj Mal, giving his
shoulder to the bier. Aṇī Rāi died at Kiratpur where a shrine honouring his memory
still exists.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.

Gurbilās Chhevīṅ Pātshāhī. Patiala, 1970
Giān Siṅgh, Giānī, Twārīkh Gurū Khālsā [Reprint]. Patiala, 1970
Macauliffe, M. A. , The Sikh Religion. Oxford, 1909
Gurnek Siṅgh

AÑJULĪĀ (Ṅ), by Gurū Arjan, is a short composition comprising two hymns entered in
the Gurū Granth Sāhib under Mārū musical measure (GG, 1019). This word añjulīā
(ṅ) is the plural form of Sanskrit añjulī which means the joining together of palms in
supplication, reverence or salutation. The word añjulīāṅ in its plural sense has been
used in the title perhaps because the composition comprises two hymns. It contains
prayer to God seeking from Him the gift of nām, i. e. meditation on His Name or
constant remembrance or repetition of His Name. Everything in this world happens
by His Will and those who are favoured by Him practise nām in holy company
(saṅgat). The tragedy of man is that he seeks happiness in material life sans any
spiritual reference. That is why he is ever in misery : when he has material
possessions in plenty, he fears he might not lose them, and when he lacks these, he
pines for them. In fact, this misery is owed neither to the excess of nor to the
meagreness of material possessions, but to man's egoistic pursuits that guide his life
in the world. Human life in this phenomenal world is transitory.

Añjulī is also the title of another of Gurū Arjan's hymns in measure Mārū (GG,
1007-08). The hymn rejects the ritual of añjulī as libation to the manes and teaches
man willingly to accept God's bhāṇā or His Will. The word añjulī also occurs in a
hymn by Gurū Rām Dās in measure Gauṛī (GG, 171) repeated in the Sohilā (GG, 1213). One is adjured to offer añjulī or salutation to the Lord which counts as an act of
virtue. Although the Farīdkoṭ Ṭīkā describes añjulī as a chhand or a prosodic form, it
is employed in the Gurū Granth Sāhib generally as a synonym for salutation or
supplication.